AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XVIII of 2024
THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF
POLLUTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, the
6 of 1974. Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 had been passed by
Parliament;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to make certain amendments
thereto for decriminalising and rationalising minor offences to further enhance
trust-based governance for ease of living and doing business;
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution
read with clause (2) thereof, resolutions have been passed by the Legislative
Assemblies of the States of Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan to the effect that the
said Act should be amended by an Act of Parliament for the purposes hereinafter
appearing.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of
Short title,
Pollution) Amendment Act, 2024. application and
commencement.

(2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Himachal
Pradesh and Rajasthan and the Union territories; and it shall apply to such other
State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of
article 252 of the Constitution read with clause (2) thereof.
(3) It shall come into force, at once in the States of Himachal Pradesh and 5
Rajasthan and the Union territories, and in any other State which adopts this Act
under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution read with clause (2) thereof on
the date of such adoption.
2.In section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 6 of 1974.
Amendment of
section 4. (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after 10
the words “State Government”, the words “in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (9), after the word
section 5. “prescribed”, the words “by the Central Government” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
4.In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the
section 25. 15
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the Central Government may in consultation
with the Central Board, by notification in the Official Gazette,
exempt certain categories of industrial plants from the provisions of
this sub-section.”. 20
5. After section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
Insertion of new
section 27A. inserted, namely:—
Power to issue “27A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Central
guidelines.
Government in consultation with the Central Board, may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, issue guidelines on the matters relating to the grant, 25
refusal or cancellation of consent by any State Board for establishment of
any industry, operation or process, or treatment and disposal system or to
bringing into use of a new or altered outlet including the mechanism for
time-bound disposal of the application made under section 25 or period of
validity of such consent. 30
(2) Every State Board, in discharge of its functions for the purposes
of grant, refusal or cancellation of consent under section 25 or section 27
shall act in accordance with the guidelines issued under sub-section (1).”.
Substitution of 6. For section 41 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
new sections 41 substituted, namely:— 35
and 41A for
section 41.
Failure to “41. (1) Whoever contravenes or does not comply with the directions
comply with
given under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 20, within such
provisions of
time as may be specified in the direction, shall, in respect of each such
section 20 or
directions issued contravention or non-compliance, be liable to pay a penalty which shall not
thereunder. be less than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh 40
rupees.
(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance
under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten
thousand rupees every day during which such contravention continues.

41A. (1) Whoever contravenes or does not comply with any order or Failure to
comply with
direction issued under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 32 or any
provisions of
direction issued by a court under sub-section (2) of section 33 or any
section 32, or
direction issued under section 33A, shall, in respect of each such directions issued
contravention or non-compliance, be liable to pay the penalty which shall under section 33
5 or section 33A.
not be less than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh
rupees.
(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance
under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten
10 thousand rupees every day during which such contravention continues.”.
7.In section 42 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 42.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the long line, the following long line shall
be substituted, namely:—
“shall be liable to pay penalty which shall not be less than ten thousand
15 rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees.”;
(b)for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance
under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of
ten thousand rupees every day during which such contravention
continues.”.
8. For sections 43 and 44 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Substitution of
be substituted, namely:— new sections for
sections 43 and
44.
“43. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 24, shall be liable Penalty for
to pay the penalty which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees, but contravention of
provisions of
which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees and where such contravention
section 24.
continues, he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten thousand
rupees every day during which such contravention continues.
44. Where for the purpose of grant of a consent in pursuance of the Penalty for
30 provisions of section 25 or section 26, the use of a meter or gauge or other contravention of
section 25 or
measure or monitoring device is required and such device is used for the
section 26.
purposes of those provisions, any person who knowingly or wilfully alters
or interferes with that device so as to prevent it from monitoring or
measuring correctly shall be liable to pay penalty which shall not be less
35 than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees.”.
9.Section 45 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
section 45.
10. For section 45A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new sections
45A to 45E for
section 45A.
‘45A. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or Penalty for
40 any order or direction issued thereunder, for which no penalty has been contravention of
certain
provided for in this Act, shall be liable to pay the penalty which shall not be
provisions of
less than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees, Act.
and where such contravention continues, he shall be liable to pay an
additional penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees for every day
45 during which such contravention continues.
45B. (1) The Central Government, for the purposes of determining the Adjudicating
penalties under the provisions of this Act shall appoint an officer not below officer.
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or a Secretary to the

State Government to be the adjudicating officer, to hold an inquiry and to
impose the penalty in the manner, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may appoint as many
adjudicating officers as may be required.
(2)The adjudicating officer may summon and enforce the attendance
of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion of the
adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject-matter of
the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned
has contravened the provisions of this Act, he may determine such penalty
as he thinks fit under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the
person concerned an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) The amount of penalty imposed under the provisions of
sections 41, 41A, 42, 43, 44, 45A and 48, shall be in addition to the liability 15
to pay relief or compensation under section 15 read with section 17 of the
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010. 19 of 2010.
Appeal. 45C. (1) Any person aggrieved by the order passed by the
adjudicating officer under section 45B may prefer an appeal to the National
Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal
Act, 2010. 19 of 2010.
(2)Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within sixty days
from the date on which the copy of the order made by the adjudicating
officer is received by the aggrieved person.
(3) The National Green Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 25
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit,
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(4)Where an appeal is preferred against any order of the adjudicating
officer under sub-section (1), such appeal shall not be entertained by the
Tribunal unless such person has deposited with the Tribunal ten per cent. of 30
the amount of the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer.
Penalty amount 45D. Where an adjudicating officer imposes penalty or additional
to be credited to penalty, as the case may be, under the provisions of this Act, the amount of
Environmental
such penalty shall be credited to the Environmental Protection Fund
Protection Fund.
established under section 16 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 35 29 of 1986.
Offences for 45E. (1) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of section 25 or
failure to section 26, in respect of each such failure, shall be punishable with
comply with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six
provisions of
section 25 or 26 months but which may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the
and for failure failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to fifty thousand 40
to pay penalty.
rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction
for the first such failure.
(2) If the failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond a
period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two 45
years but which may extend to seven years and with fine.
(3)Where any person fails to pay the penalty or the additional penalty,
as the case may be, imposed under the provisions of this Act within ninety
days of such imposition, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 50
twice the amount of the penalty or additional penalty so imposed or with
both.

(4) Where any offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) has been committed by a company, every person who, at
the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of such
offence and he shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in sub-section (1) or sub-
10 section (2) or sub-section (3), if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(5)Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (4), where an offence has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
15 committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also
have deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
20 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a)“company” includes body corporate, firm, trust, society and
any other association of individuals;
(b) “director”, includes director of the company, partner of the
firm, members of the society or trust or member of any association of
25 individuals, as the case may be.’.
11.Section 47 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
section 47.
12. For section 48 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 48.
“48. (1) Where contravention of any provision of this Act has been Penalty for
30 committed by any Department of the Central Government or State contravention
by Government
Government, the Head of the Department shall be liable to pay the penalty
Department.
equal to one month of his basic salary:
Provided that such Head of the Department shall not be liable for such
contravention, if he proves that the contravention was committed without
35 his knowledge or instructions or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent such contravention.
(2) Where any contravention under sub-section (1) is attributable to
any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of the
Department, such officer shall be liable to pay the penalty equal to one
40 month of his basic salary:
Provided that such officer shall not be liable for the contravention, if
he proves that he exercised all due diligence to avoid such contravention.”.
13.In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (a), the Amendment of
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— section 49.
45 “(aa) the adjudicating officer or any officer authorised by him in this
behalf; or”.

Amendment of 14.In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
section 63.
(i)after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the manner of nomination of the chairman of the State
Board and the terms and conditions of service of the chairman of the
State Board under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 4 and under 5
sub-section (9) of section 5;”;
(ii)after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalties by
the adjudicating officer under section 45B;”.
Amendment of 15. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (e), 10
section 64.
for the words, brackets and figures “the chairman and the member-secretary
of the State Board under sub-section (9) of section 5 and”, the words “the
member-secretary of the State Board” shall be substituted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 was enacted
under article 252 of the Constitution to provide for the prevention and control of
water pollution and the maintaining and restoring of wholesomeness of water, for
the establishment, with a view to carrying out the purposes aforesaid, of Boards
for the prevention and control of water pollution, for conferring on and assigning
to such Boards powers and functions relating thereto and for matters connected
therewith. As required by the provisions of article 252 of the Constitution, the
Legislative Assemblies of States of Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have passed
Resolution for amending the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 as proposed in the present Bill.
2. The corner stone of democratic governance lies in the Government
trusting its own people and institutions. A web of outdated rules and regulations
causes trust deficit. It has been the endeavour of the Government to achieve the
principle of “Minimum Government Maximum Governance”. The said Act, inter
alia, prescribes various penal provisions for non-compliance or contravention of
the provisions thereof punishable with imprisonments. The imprisonment
provisions for minor violations which are simple infringements not leading to any
injury to humans or damage to the environment many a times cause harassment
to business and citizen and is not in consonance with the spirit of Ease of Living
and Ease of Doing Business.
3.The Bill proposes for rationalising criminal provisions and ensuring that
citizens, business and the companies operate without fear of imprisonment for
minor, technical or procedural defaults. Also the nature of penal consequence of
an offence committed must be commensurate with the seriousness of offence.
This Bill seeks to establish a balance between the severity of the offence and the
gravity of the punishment provided in this regard.
4.The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024,
inter alia, seeks to provide—
(a) the manner of nomination of the chairman of the State Pollution
Control Board is to be prescribed by the Central Government;
(b) that the Central Government may exempt certain categories of
industrial plants from the application of section 25 relating to restriction on
new outlets and new discharges;
(c) that the Central Government may issue guidelines on the matters
relating to the grant, refusal or cancellation of consent by any State Board
for establishment of any industry, operation or process, or treatment and
disposal system or bringing into use of new or altered outlets, etc.;
(d) for decriminalising of minor offences and replacing it with
monetary penalty in case of continuation of contravention;
(e)the manner of adjudication of penalties by the adjudicating officer
who shall be an officer of not less than the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or Secretary to the State Government;
(f)punishment for failure to comply with the provisions of section 25
relating to restrictions on new outlets and new discharges and section 26
relating to existing discharge of sewage or trade effluent, etc.;
(g) the amount of penalty imposed is to be credited to the
Environmental Protection Fund established under section 16 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
5.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; BHUPENDER YADAV.
The 31st January, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted, would not involve any financial expenditure either
recurring or non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 to confer power upon the
Central Government to make rules to provide for manner of nomination of
chairman of State Pollution Control Board.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 to confer power upon the
Central Government to make rules to provide the other terms and conditions of
service of the chairman.
Clause 10 of the Bill, inter alia, seeks to insert section 45B which confers
power upon the Central Government to make rules to provide for the manner to
hold an inquiry and to impose penalty by the adjudicating officer for the purpose
of the Bill.
The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as they are
made, before each House of Parliament.
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters of
procedures and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL
OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974
(6 OF 1974)
* * * * *
Constitution of 4.(1) * * * * *
State Board.
(2)A State Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a)a chairman, being a person having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of matters relating to environmental protection or a
person having knowledge and experience in administering institutions
dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be nominated by the State
Government:
Provided that the chairman may be either whole-time or part-time as
the State Government may think fit;
* * * * *
Terms and 5.(1) * * * * *
conditions of
service of (9)The other terms and conditions of service of the chairman shall be such
members.
as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
Restrictions on 25.(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, no person shall, without the
new outlets and
previous consent of the State Board,—
new discharges.
(a) establish or take any steps to establish any industry, operation or
process, or any treatment and disposal system or any extension or addition
thereto, which is likely to discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream
or well or sewer or on land (such discharge being hereafter in this section
referred to as discharge of sewage); or
(b) bring into use any new or altered outlet for the discharge of
sewage; or
(c)begin to make any new discharge of sewage:
Provided that a person in the process of taking any steps to establish any
industry, operation or process immediately before the commencement of the
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1988, for which no 53 of 1988.
consent was necessary prior to such commencement, may continue to do so for a
period of three months from such commencement or, if he has made an
application for such consent, within the said period of three months, till the
disposal of such application.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
Failure to comply 41.(1) Whoever fails to comply with the direction given under sub-section (2)
with directions or sub-section (3) of section 20 within such time as may be specified in the direction
under sub-section
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
(2) or sub-section
(3) of section 20, to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both
or orders issued and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to five
under clause (c) thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction
of sub-section (1)
for the first such failure.
of section 32 or
directions issued
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any order issued under clause (c) of
under subsection
(2) of section 33 sub-section (1) of section 32 or any direction issued by a court under sub-section
or section 33A. (2) of section 33 or any direction issued under section 33A shall, in respect of
each such failure and on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term

which shall not be less than one year and six months but which may extend to six
years and with fine, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure
continues after the conviction for the first such failure.
(3)If the failure referred to in sub-section (2) continues beyond a period of
one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall, on conviction, be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years
but which may extend to seven years and with fine.
42.(1) Whoever— Penalty for
certain acts.
(a) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any pillar, post
or stake fixed in the ground or any notice or other matter put up, inscribed
or placed, by or under the authority of the Board, or
(b) obstructs any person acting under the orders or directions of the
Board from exercising his powers and performing his functions under this
Act, or
(c)damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or
(d)fails to furnish to any officer or other employee of the Board any
information required by him for the purpose of this Act, or
(e)fails to intimate the occurrence of any accident or other unforeseen
act or event under section 31 to the Board and other authorities or agencies
as required by that section, or
(f) in giving any information which he is required to give under this
Act, knowingly or wilfully makes a statement which is false in any material
particular, or
(g) for the purpose of obtaining any consent under section 25 or
section 26, knowingly or wilfully makes a statement which is false in any
material particular,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
(2) Where for the grant of a consent in pursuance of the provisions of
section 25 or section 26 the use of meter or gauge or other measure or monitoring
device is required and such device is used for the purposes of those provisions,
any person who knowingly or wilfully alters or interferes with that device so as
to prevent it from monitoring or measuring correctly shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
43. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 24 shall be punishable Penalty for
contravention of
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months
provisions of
but which may extend to six years and with fine. section 24.
44.Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 25 or section 26 shall be Penalty for
contravention of
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
section 25 or
and six months but which may extend to six years and with fine.
section 26.
45. If any person who has been convicted of any offence under section 24 Enhanced
or section 25 or section 26 is again found guilty of an offence involving a penalty after
previous
contravention of the same provision, he shall, on the second and on every
conviction.
subsequent conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years and with fine:
Provided that for the purpose of this section no cognizance shall be taken of
any conviction made more than two years before the commission of the offence
which is being punished.

Penalty for 45A. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or fails to
contravention of
comply with any order or direction given under this Act, for which no penalty has
certain
been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment which
provisions of the
Act. may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an
additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during
which such contravention or failure continues after conviction for the first such
contravention or failure.
* * * * *
Offences by 47.(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
companies. every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and
was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where, an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a)“company” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b)“director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Offences by
48.Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department
Government
Departments. of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the
Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
Cognizance of 49.(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except
offences. on a complaint made by—
(a)a Board or any officer authorised in this behalf by it; or
(b)any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the
manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a
complaint, to the Board or officer authorised as aforesaid,
and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
* * * * *
Power of 63.(1) * * * * *
Central
Government to (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
make rules.
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the terms and conditions of service of the members (other than the
chairman and member-secretary) of the Central Board under sub-section (8) of
section 5;
* * * * *
64.(1) * * * * * Power of State
Government to
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing make rules.
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(e) the terms and conditions of service of the chairman and the
member-secretary of the State Board under sub-section (9) of section 5 and
under sub-section (1) of section 12;
* * * * *

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
————
(Shri Bhupender Yadav, Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and Labour & Employment)
RS-P&PS-GB(E)—002—01.02.2024