As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 18 of 2024
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR LOCAL BODIES LAWS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend theJammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (IX o/1989),
the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 (XX o/2000) and the Jammu
and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (XXI o/2000).
WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and
Kashmir is not in existence and proclamation made by the Government of India
vide number S.O 3937 (E), dated the 31st October, 2019, in terms of section 73
of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 is in force;
34 of 2019. AND WHEREAS in terms of the aforesaid Proclamation, the powers of the
Legislature of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be exercisable by
or under the authority of Parliament.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (I) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws Short title and
commencement.
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR PANCHAYATI RAJ ACT, 1989
Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (hereafter Jammu and
section 2. in this Chapter referred to as the Panchayati Raj Act), in sub-section (1), after Kashmir Act
IX of 1989.
clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 5
'(la) "Other Backward Classes" means the Other Backward Classes
declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir
from time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (o ) of section 2
of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;'. Jammu and
Kashmir Act
Substitution of 3. For section 2A of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be 10 XIV of 2004.
section 2A. substituted, namely:-
Construction of '2A. Throughout the Act, for the words "District Planning and
reference of
Development Board" and "District Panchayat Officer" wherever they occur,
certain
expressions by the words "the District Development Council" and "Assistant Commissioner of
certain other Panchayat" shall respectively be substituted.'. 15
expressions.
Amendment of 4. In section 4 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),-
section 4.
(a) in the first proviso,-
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, 20
namely:-
"(b ) the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the Other Backward Classes,";
(iii) in the long line, after the words "or of the Scheduled Tribes
in that Panchayat area", the words "or of the Other Backward Classes 25
in that Panchayat area" shall be inserted;
(b) in the second proviso,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes,", the words "or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 30
(ii) in clause ( b ), for the words "and the Scheduled Tribes", the
words "the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes" shall
be substituted.
Amendment of 5. In section 27 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),-
section 27.
(a) in the first proviso,- 35
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause ( b) , the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:-
"(b ) the Scheduled Tribes; and 40
(c) the Other Backward Classes,";
(iii) in the long line, after the words "or of the Scheduled Tribes
in that district", the words "or of the Other Backward Classes in that
district" shall be inserted;

( b) in the second proviso,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "or, as the case may be, the
scheduled tribes,", the words "or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
5 (ii) in clause (b), for the words "or the Scheduled Tribes", the
words "or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes" shall
be substituted.
6. In section 36A of the Panchayati Raj Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the Amendment of
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- section 36A.
IO "(2) The salary, allowance and other conditions of service of the State
Election Commissioner shall be such as the Lieutenant Governor may, by
rules, determine:
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of
assuming office as the State Election Commissioner is in receipt of or has
15 received or has become entitled to receive a pension, other than a disability
pension, in respect of any previous service under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State or under the Government of a Union
territory, his pay in respect of service as State Election Commissioner shall
be reduced-
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
( b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion
of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the
commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension.
(3) The travelling allowance, provision of rent-free accommodation,
25 conveyance facilities, medical facilities available to a person at the time of
retirement or at the time of his appointment as State Election Commissioner, so
far as may be, shall be admissible to him.
( 4) The power to grant or refuse leave to the State Election
Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the
30 Lieutenant Governor.".
7. For section 36B of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:- section 36B.
"36B. The State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his Removal of
office except in like manner and on the like ground as a Judge of a High State Election
Commissioner.
35 Court and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner shall
not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.".
8. In section 36D of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (2),- Amendment of
section 36D.
(a) for the opening portion "The Commission shall have power to",
the opening portion "The Commission referred to in sub-section (J) shall"
40 shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (b), for the words "give such directions", the words "by
order give such directions" shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (c), for the word "delegate", the words "by order, delegate,
subject to such restrictions mentioned therein," shall be substituted.
45 9. In section 39 of the Panchayati Raj Act, after clause (iii), the following Amendment of
clause shall be inserted, namely:- section 39.
"(iv) such other grounds as may be determined by the State Election
Commission.".

Amendment of 10. In section 45A of the Panchayati Raj Act,
section 45A.
(a) in sub-section (4),-
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause ( b ), the following clauses shall be substituted, 5
namely:-
"(b ) for the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) for the Other Backward Classes,";
(iii) in the long line, after the words "or of the Scheduled Tribes
in the district", the words "or of the Other Backward Classes in the 10
district" shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words "or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes,", the words "or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be," shall be substituted;
( c) in sub-section ( 6), for the words "Scheduled Castes and the 15
Scheduled Tribes", the words "Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL ACT, 2000
Construction of 11. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000, (hereafter in 20 Jammu and
reference of Kaslunir Act
this Chapter referred to as the Municipal Act), for the words "Chief Electoral
certain XX of 2000.
expressions by Officer" and "Backward Classes", wherever they occur, the words "State Election
certain other Commission" and "Other Backward Classes" shall respectively be substituted.
expressions.
Amendment of
12. In section 2 of the Municipal Act,-
section 2.
(a) clause (J) shall be omitted; 25
(b) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;-
'(27a) "Other Backward Classes" means the Other Backward
Classes declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and
Kashmir from time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (o )
of section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;'; 30 Janunu and
Kashmir Act
(c) after clause (29b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- XIV of 2004.
'(29bb) "State Election Commission" means the Commission
constituted under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati
Jammu and
Raj Act, 1989;'.
Kashmir Act
Amendment of 13. In section 1 lA of the Municipal Act,- 35 IX of 1989.
section I IA.
(a) in sub-section (J), for the words "the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted;
( b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 40
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted;

(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words "Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe Certificate", the words "Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other
Backward Class Certificate" shall be substituted; and;
(e) for sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
5 namely,-
"(4 ) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent
authority for the purposes of this section.".
14. In section 282 of the Municipal Act, for sub-section (2), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- section 282.
10 "(2) The Commission referred to in sub-section (1) shall-
(i) require any person, including an officer or an employee of the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, subject to
any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for
the time being in force in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir,
15 to furnish information on any matter which, in the opinion of the
Commission, may be useful for or relevant to the subject of enquiry;
(ii) by order, give such directions to the officers and employees
of the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, or
any other statutory body or society as it considers necessary to ensure
20 smooth and efficient conduct of elections under this Act;
(iii) by order, delegate, subject to such restrictions mentioned
therein, any of its powers to such officers and employees of the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir;
(iv) determine and delimit the municipalities in accordance with
25 the provisions of this Act;
(v) regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of time and
place of its sittings; and
( vi) exercise such other powers as may be determined by the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, from time
30 to time.".
15. After section 282 of the Municipal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:- section 282A.
"282A. Sections 36, 36A, 36B, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the Application of
Panchayati Raj Act [as amended by the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies certain
provisions of
35 Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024] shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to this Act.".
Jammu and
Kashmir
Panchayati Raj
Act. 1989.
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 2000
Jammu and 16. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 Construction of
Kashmir Act (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Municipal Corporation Act) for the reference of
XXIof2000. certain
40 words "Chief Electoral Officer" and "Backward Classes", wherever they occur, expressions by
the words "State Election Commission" and "Other Backward Classes" shall certain other
respectively be substituted. expressions.
17. In section 2 of the Municipal Corporation Act, Amendment of
section 2.
(a) clause (1) shall be omitted;
45 (b) clause (6) shall be omitted;
(c) after clause (37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

'(37a) "Other Backward Classes" means the Other Backward
Classes declared by the Government of the Union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir from time to time in accordance with
sub-clause (iii) of clause (o) of section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir
Reservation Act, 2004;'; 5 Jammu and
Kashmir Act
(d) after clause (59), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- XIV of 2004.
'(59a) "State Election Commission" means the Commission
constituted under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati
Jammu and
Raj Act, 1989.'.
Kashmir Act
Insertion of new 18. After section 9 of the Municipal Corporation Act, the following 10 IX of 1989.
section 9A.
section shall be inserted, namely:-
Application of "9A. Sections 36, 36A, 36B, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the
certain
Panchayati Raj Act and sub-section (2) of section 282 of the Municipal
provisions of
Jammuand Act [a s amended by the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws
Kashmir (Amendment) Act, 2024] shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to this Act.". 15
Panchayati Raj
Act, 1989 and
Jammu and
Kashmir
Municipal Act,
2000.
Amendment of 19. In section lOA of the Municipal Corporation Act,-
section I OA.
(a) in sub~section (1), for the words "the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "the Scheduled Castes or the 20
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes", the words "the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes" shall be substituted; 25
(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words "Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe Certificate", the words "Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or
Other Backward Class Certificate" shall be substituted; and
(e ) for sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:- 30
"(4 ) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent
authority for the purpose of this section.".

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 seeks
to amend certain provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989,
the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 and the Jammu and Kashmir
Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (the Acts) in consonance with the provisions of
the Part IX and Part IXA of the Constitution.
2. Part IX and Part IXA of the Constitution relates to "the Panchayats" and
"the Municipalities". Clause (6) of articles 243D and 243T of the Constitution
empowers the Legislature of a State to make provision for reservation of seats in
any "Panchayat" and "Municipality" in favour of backward classes of citizens.
However, the Acts of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir has no provision
for reservation of seats for "Other Backward Classes" in the Panchayats and the
Municipalities.
3. According to articles 243K and 243ZA of the Constitution, the
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and
the conduct of all elections to the Panchayats and Municipalities is vested in a
"State Election Commission" consisting of a "State Election Commissioner". The
similar provision was incorporated in the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj
Act, 1989. However, as per Municipal laws of the Union territory of the Jammu
and Kashmir the conduct of all elections to the Municipalities and Municipal
Corporations lies with "the Chief Electoral Officer" of Jammu and Kashmir.
4. Proviso to clause (2) of article 243K of the Constitution envisages that
the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in
like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and the conditions
of service of the State Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment. But, section 36B of the Jammu and Kashmir
Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 provides that the State Election Commissioner shall not
be removed from his office except by an order made by the Lieutenant Governor
on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry conducted by
a sitting or a retired judge of the High Court, on a reference made to him by the
Lieutenant Governor. The provisions pertaining to State Election Commissioner
in the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 are at variance with the
provisions of the Constitution.
5. In order to provide reservation to the "Other Backward Classes" in the
Panchayats and the Municipalities in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir
and to bring consistency in the local bodies laws of the Union territory of Jammu
and Kashmir with the provisions of the Constitution, it has become necessary to
amend certain provisions of the Acts and to introduce a Bill in Parliament, namely,
the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024. With this,
justice will be ensured to the citizens of Other Backward Classes of Jammu and
Kashmir for the first time after 75 years of independence.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 2nd February, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024, if
enacted, would not involve any expenditure either recurring or non-recurring from
and out of the Consolidated fund oflndia.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR PANCHAYATI RAJ ACT, 1989
(Act No. IX OF 1989)
* * * * *
2. (I) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions.
* * * * *
(l) "Naib-Sarpanch" means the Naib-Sarpanch of the Halqa Panchayat;
* * * * *
2A. Throughout the Act, for "District Planning and Development Board" Substitution of
wherever then occur substitute "the District Development Council". certain
expressions.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
Halqa Panchayat
4. (I)* * * * * Establishment
and constitution
(3) Every Halqa Panchayat shall consist of such number of Panches not less ofHalqa
than seven and not more than eleven excluding the sarpanch as the prescribed Panchayat.
authority may, from time to time, fix in this behalf:
Provided that the sarpanch and panch seats shall be reserved for
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the scheduled Tribes,
in every Halqa Panchayat and the number of sarpanch and panch seats so reserved
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of panch
seats to be filled by direct election in that panchayat as the population of
Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribe in that
Panchayat area bears to the total population in that area and such sarpanch and
panch seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Halqa
Panchayat in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed:
Provided further that-
( a) not less than one-third of the total number ofsarpanch and panch
seats reserved under above proviso shall be reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes;
(b) not less than one-third (including the number of sarpanch and
panch seats reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election
in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat by such
authority and in such manner as may be prescribed:
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
Block Development Council
27. (I)* * * * * Constitution of
Block
(3) The Block Development Council shall consists of- Development
Council.

(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) all Sarpanches ofHalqa Panchayats falling within the Block:
Provided that the offices of the Chairpersons of Block Development
Councils shall be reserved for-
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every district and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may
be, the same proportion to the total number of offices of Chairpersons to be filled
by direct election in that district as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that
district, or of the Scheduled Tribes in that district, bears to the total population in
that district and such offices may be allotted by rotation to different Block
Development Council Constituencies in a district in such manner and by such
authority as may be prescribed:
Provided further that-
(a) not less than one-third of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons reserved under the above proviso shall be reserved for women
belonging to the scheduled castes or, as the case may be, the scheduled
tribes; and
(b) not less than one-third of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons to be filled by direct election in the district shall be reserved
for women (including the number of offices of Chairpersons of Block
Development Councils reserved for women belonging to scheduled castes
or scheduled tribes) and such offices may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a district by such authority and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
* * * * *
Term of office 36A. (I)* * * * *
and other
conditions of (2) On ceasing to hold office, the State Election Commissioner shall be
service of State ineligible for, reappointment to that office or, any other assignment or
Election appointment to any office under the Government of India or under the
Commissioner.
Government of any State.
(3) The salary, allowance and other conditions of the State Election
Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed from time to time:
Provided that if the State Election Commissioner is at the time of his
appointment eligible for, or in receipt of, a pension in respect of any previous service,
his salary in respect of service as State Election Commissioner shall be reduced,-
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
( b) if he has before such appointment received, in lieu of a portion of
the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted
value thereof, by the amount of that amount of pension.
Removal of the 36B. (I) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the State Election
State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by
Commissioner.
the Lieutenant Governor on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after
an enquiry conducted by a sitting or a retired judge of the High Court, on a
reference made to him by the Lieutenant Governor.
(2) The Lieutenant Governor may suspend from office, and if necessary
prohibit also from attending the office during inquiry, the State Election
Commissioner in respect of whom a reference has been made to the Inquiry
Officer under sub-section (I) until the Lieutenant Governor has passed orders on
receipt of the report of the Inquiry Officer on such reference.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section(]), the Lieutenant Governor
may by order remove from office the State Election Commissioner, ifhe:-
(a) is adjudged as insolvent; or
( b) engages during the term of his office in any employment outside
the duties of his office; or
(c ) is unfit to continue in his office by reason of his infirmity of mind
or body; or
(d) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for offence which
involves moral turpitude.
* * * * *
36D. (]) * * * * * Powers of the
State Election
(2) The Commission shall have the power to- Commission.
* * * * *
(b) give such directions to the officers and employees of the
Government of the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir or the
Panchayat Raj Institutions or any other statutory body or society as it
considers necessary to ensure smooth and efficient conduct of
elections under this Act;
( c) delegate any of its powers to such officers and employees of
the Government of the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, as it
may deem necessary;
* * * * *
39. A Person shall be disqualified for registration in an electoral roll ifhe,- Disqualification
for registration
* * * * * in an electoral
roll.
(iii) has not attained age of 18 years.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XI
District Planning and Development Board
45A. (])* * * * * Constitution of
District
( 4) Seats to be filled by direct election shall be reserved in the District Development
Development Council- Council.
( a) for the Scheduled Castes; and
( b) for the Scheduled Tribes, and the number of seats to be filled by
direct election so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the
District Development Council as the population of the Scheduled Castes in
the district or of the Scheduled Tribes in the district bears to the total
population of the district.
(5) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
sub-section ( 4) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
( 6) One-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to
be filled by direct election in every District Development Council shall be
reserved for women.
* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL ACT, 2000
(Act No. XX OF 2000)
* * * * *
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-
(]) "backward classes" means such classes of citizens other than
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes as may be identified and notified for
the purposes of reservation for appointments or posts in the services under
the Government;
* * * * *
(27) "occupier" includes any person, for the time being paying or
liable to pay, to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or
building in respect of which the word is used or damages on account of the
occupation of such land or building, and also an owner living in or otherwise
using, his own land or building and also a rent-free tenant;
* * * * *
(29-b) "Special Tribunal" means the Special Tribunal constituted
under section 4 of the Jammu and Kashmir Special Tribunal Act, 1988;
* * * * *
11-A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Reservation of
seats for certain Tribes in every Municipality in proportion to the total population of the Scheduled
categories. Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal Area and such seats may be allotted
by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
sub-section (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total
number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Municipality shall be reserved
for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies
in the Municipality.
(3-A) A person who becomes a member or an office bearer of a Municipality
on the basis of a false Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe Certificate, shall be
disqualified from the date on which it is found that he had become such member
or office bearer on the basis of such false caste certificate and shall continue to be
disqualified for further period of six years.
( 4) The Deputy Commissioner concerned or the Chief Electoral Officer, as
the Government may appoint in this behalf, shall be the competent authority for
purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
282. (])* * * * *
Chief Electoral
Officer.
(2) The Commission shall frame its own rules and lay its own procedure.
* * * * *

EXTRACTS FROM THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
ACT,2000
(Act No. XXI OF 2000)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- Definitions.
(]) "backward classes" means such classes of citizens other than
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, as may be identified and notified for
the purpose of reservation for appointments or posts in the services under
the Government;
* * * * *
( 6) "Chief Electoral Officer" means the Chief Electoral Officer;
* * * * *
(37) "offensive matter" includes animal carcasses, kitchen or stable
refuse, dung, dirt and putrid or putrefying substances, other than sewage;
* * * * *
(59) "Special Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under section 4
of the Jammu and Kashmir Special Tribunal Act, 1988;
* * * * *
10-A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Reservation of
Tribes in every Corporation in proportion to the total population of the Scheduled seats for certain
categories.
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the area falling under the Municipal Corporation
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Corporation.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
sub-section (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or
the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total
number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Corporation shall be reserved
for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies
in the Corporation.
(3-A) A person who becomes a member or an office bearer of a Corporation
on production of a false Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe Certificate, shall be
disqualified from the date on which it is found that he had become such member
or office bearer on the basis of such false caste certificate and shall continue to be
disqualified for further period of six years.
( 4) The Deputy Commissioner concerned or the Chief Electoral Officer, as
the Government may appoint in this behalf, shall be the competent authority for
purposes of this Act.
* * * * *

LOKSABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (IX of 1989), the
Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 (XX of 2000) and the Jammu and
Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (XXI of2000).
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister ofH ome Affairs and Cooperation)