AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH AUGUST, 2024
Bill No. LIV of 2024
THE BOILERS BILL, 2024
––––––
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
––––––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1.Short title, commencement and application.
2.Definitions.
CHAPTER II
CENTRAL BOILERS BOARD
3.Central Boilers Board.
4.Technical Adviser.
CHAPTER III
INSPECTION, CERTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION
5.Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector and Inspector.
6.Competent authority to grant welders certificate.
7.Conditions precedent for manufacture of boiler and boiler components.
8.Inspection during manufacture.
9.Inspection during erection.
10.Conditions precedent for repairing boiler and boiler components.
11.Prohibition of use of unregistered or uncertified boiler.
12.Registration.
13.Renewal of certificate.
14. Provisional order.
15.Use of boiler pending grant of certificate.
16.Revocation of certificate or provisional order.
17.Alteration and renewal of boiler.
18.Alteration and renewal of steam-pipe or boiler components.
19.Duty of owner at examination.
20.Production of certificate and provisional order.
21.Transfer of certificate and provisional order.
22.Powers of entry of Inspector.
23.Report of accident.

(ii)
CHAPTER IV
APPEAL
CLAUSES
24. Appeal to Chief Inspector.
25. Appeal to Central Government.
26. Application for revision of order
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
27. Minor penalties.
28. Penalties for illegal use of boiler.
29. Punishment for certain offences.
30. Penalty for tampering with register mark.
31. Penalty for breach of rules or regulations.
32. Recovery of penalties.
33. Limitation and previous sanction for prosecution.
34. Trial of offences.
35. Adjudication of penalties.
36. Appeal against orders of adjudicating officer.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
37. Power of Central Government to give directions.
38. Exemptions.
39. Power of Central Government to make rules.
40. Power of Board to make regulations.
41. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
42. Power of State Government to make rules.
43.Finality of orders.
44.Power to remove difficulties.
45.Repeal and savings.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH AUGUST, 2024
Bill No. LIV of 2024
THE BOILERS BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of boilers, safety of life and property of persons from
the danger of explosions of steam-boilers and for uniformity in registration
and inspection during manufacture, erection and use of boilers in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1.(1) This Act may be called the Boilers Act, 2024. Short title,
commencement
(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by and application.
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed
for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into
10 force of that provision.

(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to all boilers and boiler components including boilers and boiler
components belonging to the Central Government and the State Governments.
(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to—
(a) locomotive boilers belonging to or under the control of the 5
railways;
(b) any boiler or boiler components,—
(i) in any vessel propelled wholly or in part by the agency of
steam;
(ii) belonging to or under the control of the Army, Navy or Air 10
Force; or
(iii) appertaining to a sterilizer or disinfector used in hospitals
or nursing homes, if the boiler does not exceed one hundred litres in
capacity.
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 15
(a) “accident” means an explosion of boiler or boiler components,
which is calculated to weaken the strength or an uncontrolled release of
water or steam therefrom, liable to cause death or injury to any person or
damage to any property;
(b) “Board” means the Central Boilers Board constituted under section 3; 20
(c) “boiler” means a pressure vessel in which steam is generated for
use external to itself by application of heat which is wholly or partly under
pressure when steam is shut off but does not include a pressure vessel,—
(i) with capacity less than twenty-five litres, such capacity being
measured from the feed check valve to the main steam stop valve; or 25
(ii) with less than one kilogram per centimetre square design
gauge pressure and working gauge pressure; or
(iii) in which water is heated below one hundred degrees
centigrade;
(d) “boiler components” means steam piping, feed piping, economiser, 30
superheater, any mounting or other fitting and any other external or internal
part of a boiler which is subject to pressure exceeding one kilogram per
centimetre square gauge.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term “superheater”
means any equipment which is partly or wholly exposed to flue gases for 35
the purpose of raising the temperature of steam beyond the saturation
temperature at that pressure and includes a re-heater;
(e) “Chief Inspector”, “Deputy Chief Inspector” and “Inspector”,
mean, respectively, a person appointed to be a Chief Inspector, a Deputy
Chief Inspector and an Inspector under section 5; 40
(f) “competent authority” means an institution referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(g) “competent person” means an inspector or a person recognised in
such manner as may be specified by regulations, for inspection and
certification of boilers and boiler components during manufacture, erection 45
and use;

(h) “economiser” means any part of a feed-pipe that is wholly or
partially exposed to the action of flue gases for the purpose of recovery of
waste heat;
(i) “feed-pipe” means any pipe or connected fitting wholly or partly
5 under pressure through which feed water passes directly to a boiler and
which does not form an integral part thereof;
(j) “inspecting authority” means a chief inspector or an institution
recognised in such manner as may be specified by regulations, for the
inspection and certification of boilers and boiler components during
10 manufacture and erection;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
(l) “manufacture” means manufacture, construction and fabrication of
boiler or boiler components, or both;
15 (m) “manufacturer” means a person engaged in the manufacture of
boiler or boiler components, or both;
(n) “owner” includes any person possessing or using a boiler as agent
of the owner thereof and any person using a boiler which he has hired or
obtained on loan from the owner thereof;
20 (o) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(p) “regulations” means regulations made by the Board under section 40;
(q) “State Government’’ shall include Union territory administration;
(r) “steam-pipe” means any pipe through which steam passes, if—
(i) the pressure at which steam passes through such pipe exceeds
25 three and half kilogram per square centimeters above atmospheric
pressure; or
(ii) such pipe exceeds two hundred fifty-four millimeters in
internal diameter and the pressure of steam exceeds one kilogram per
square centimeters above the atmospheric pressure,
30 and includes in either case, any connected fitting of a steam-pipe and
feed-pipe;
(s) “structural alteration, addition or renewal” means,—
(i) any change in the design of a boiler or boiler components;
(ii) replacement of any part of boiler or boiler components by a
35 part which does not conform to the same specification; or
(iii) any addition to any part of a boiler or boiler components;
(t) “Technical Adviser” means the Technical Adviser appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 4.
CHAPTER II
40 CENTRAL BOILERS BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute a Board to Central Boilers
be called the Central Boilers Board, for the purposes of this Act. Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India incharge of the
45 Department having administrative control of the Board who shall be the
Chairperson, ex officio;

(b) one member to represent each State, other than Union territory,
who shall be a senior technical officer conversant with the inspection and
examination of boilers, to be nominated by that State Government;
(c) members, equal in number to members nominated under
clause (b), to be nominated by the Central Government, to represent 5
the following, namely:—
(i) the Central Government;
(ii) the Bureau of Indian Standards;
(iii) boiler and boiler components manufactures;
(iv) National laboratories; 10
(v) engineering consultancy agencies;
(vi) users of boilers; and
(vii) such other interests which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, ought to be represented on the Board;
(d) Technical Adviser, who shall be the Member-Secretary, ex officio. 15
(3) The term of office of the members nominated under clauses (b) and (c)
of sub-section (2), and the manner of their nomination, shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Board may determine its own procedure for the conduct of all
business to be transacted by it. 20
(5) The Board shall have power to constitute committees and
sub-committees from amongst its members and to delegate any of its powers and
duties to such committees or sub-committees.
(6) The powers of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy
in the Board. 25
(7) The functions of the Board shall be to regulate the design, manufacture,
erection and use of boiler and boiler components to ensure safety of life and
property of persons from the danger of explosions of steam-boilers and for
uniformity in registration and inspection and for these purposes, make such
regulations as it deems fit. 30
Technical 4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint a Technical
Adviser. Adviser from amongst the persons having such qualifications and experience as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
the Technical Adviser shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 35
Government.
(3) The Technical Adviser shall, in addition to exercising the powers and
discharging the functions assigned to him under this Act and the rules and
regulations made thereunder, exercise such other powers and discharge such
functions as the Central Government and the Board may delegate to him. 40
CHAPTER III
INSPECTION, CERTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION
Chief Inspector, 5. (1) The State Government may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be
Deputy Chief Inspectors for the State for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limits
Inspector and
Inspector. within which each Inspector shall exercise the powers and perform the duties 45
conferred and imposed on Inspectors by or under this Act.

(2) The State Government may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be
Deputy Chief Inspectors for the State and may define the local limits within which
each Deputy Chief Inspector shall exercise powers and perform duties under this
Act.
5 (3) A Deputy Chief Inspector may exercise the powers and perform the
duties conferred and imposed on an Inspector by or under this Act and, in addition
thereto, may exercise such powers or perform such duties conferred or imposed
on the Chief Inspector by or under this Act, as the State Government may assign
to him.
10 (4) The State Government shall appoint a person to be the Chief Inspector
for the State who may, in addition to the powers and duties conferred and imposed
on a Chief Inspector by or under this Act, exercise any power or perform any duty
so conferred or imposed on Deputy Chief Inspectors or Inspectors.
(5) No person shall be appointed as a Chief Inspector, or Deputy Chief
15 Inspectors or Inspectors, unless he possesses such qualifications and experience
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Deputy Chief Inspectors and
Inspectors shall exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred and imposed
on them by or under this Act under the general superintendence and control of the
20 Chief Inspector.
(7) The Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors may offer
such advice as they think fit to the owners regarding the proper maintenance and
safe working of boilers.
(8) The Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors shall
25 exercise such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(9) The Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the
45 of 2023. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.
30 6. (1) The competent authority shall be an institution recognised in such Competent
manner as may be specified by regulations, for grant of certificate to the welders authority to
grant welders
for welding of boiler and boiler components.
certificate.
(2) Any person who intends to undertake any welding work connected with
or related to a boiler or a boiler component, or both, shall apply to the competent
35 authority for the grant of such welders certificate as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the competent
authority shall follow such procedure for examination and grant of welders
certificate as may be specified by regulations.
40 (4) The competent authority may, if satisfied that the person applying for
welders certificate under sub-section (2) has complied with the conditions for the
grant of the welders certificate, grant such certificate, subject to such other
conditions and on payment of such fee, as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that the competent authority shall not refuse such certificate to any
45 person unless the person is given an opportunity of being heard.
7. No person shall manufacture or cause to be manufactured any boiler or Conditions
boiler components, or both, unless— precedent for
manufacture of
(a) the premises or precincts wherein boiler or boiler components, or boiler and boiler
components.
both, are manufactured, have such facilities for design and construction as
50 may be specified by regulations;

(b) a certificate for the design and drawings of the boiler and boiler
components have been granted by the inspecting authority under clause (a) of
sub-section (3) of section 8;
(c) the material, mounting and fitting used in the construction of boiler
or boiler components, or both, conform to such specifications as may be 5
specified by regulations; and
(d) the person engaged in welding boiler or boiler components hold
welders certificate granted by the competent authority under sub-section (4)
of section 6.
Inspection 8. (1) Every manufacturer, before commencing manufacture of a boiler or 10
during boiler components, shall engage an inspecting authority for carrying out
manufacture. inspection at such stages of manufacture as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The inspecting authority engaged under sub-section (1) shall follow such
procedure for inspection and certification of boiler or boiler components as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) Where, after inspection, the inspecting authority—
(a) is satisfied that the design and drawings of the boiler or the boiler
components conforms to the standards as may be specified by regulations,
it shall grant a certificate of inspection and stamp the boiler or boiler
components, or both; or 20
(b) is of the opinion that the boiler or boiler components, or both, does
not conform to such standards as may be specified by regulations, it may for
reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant such certificate:
Provided that no certificate shall be refused unless the inspecting authority s
has directed the manufacturer of the boiler or boiler components, or both, in 25
writing to carry out such modifications or rectifications as it deems necessary and
the inspecting authority is of the opinion that inspite of such direction, the
manufacturer of the boiler or boiler components, or both, has not carried out the
modifications or rectifications.
(4) The inspecting authority may, for the purposes of inspection under this 30
section, charge such fee as may be specified by regulations.
Inspection 9. (1) Any owner who intends to register a boiler under section 12, shall
during erection. engage an inspecting authority for carrying out inspection at the stage of erection
of the boiler.
(2) The inspecting authority shall follow such procedure for inspection and 35
certification of a boiler or boiler components, or both, as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) Where, after inspection, the inspecting authority—
(a) is satisfied that the erection of the boiler is in accordance with such
standards as may be specified by regulations, it shall grant a certificate of 40
inspection in such form as may be specified by regulations; or
(b) is of the opinion that the boiler has not been erected in accordance
with such regulations, it may for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to
grant the certificate and shall communicate such refusal to the owner and
the manufacturer of the boiler or boiler components forthwith: 45
Provided that no such certificate shall be refused unless the inspecting
authority has directed the owner in writing to carry out such modifications or
rectifications as it deems necessary and the inspecting authority is of the opinion
that in spite of such direction, the owner has not carried out the modifications or
rectifications. 50

(4) The inspecting authority may, for the purposes of inspection under this
section, charge such fee as may be specified by regulations.
10. (1) No person shall repair or cause to be repaired boiler or boiler Conditions
components, or both, unless— precedent for
repairing boiler
5 (a) the premises or precincts, wherein boiler or boiler components or and boiler
both, are being used has such facilities for repairs as may be specified by components.
regulations;
(b) the design and drawings of the boiler or boiler components conform to
such standards, and the material, mounting and fitting used in the repair of boiler
10 or boiler components, conform to such specifications as may be specified by
regulations;
(c) persons engaged in welding, holds a welders certificate granted by
the competent authority under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(d) the user who does not have the in-house facilities for repair of boiler or
15 boiler components, engages a boiler repairer possessing a boiler repairer certificate;
(e) the user engage a competent person for approval of repairs to be
carried out in-house or by the repairers;
(f) the safety of persons working inside a boiler is ensured, by taking
such measures, as may be specified by regulations.
20 (2) A boiler repairer shall obtain such certificate in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
11. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no owner of a boiler Prohibition of
shall use the boiler or permit it to be used,— use of
unregistered or
(a) unless it has been registered in accordance with the provisions of uncertified
25 this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder; boiler.
(b) any boiler which has been transferred from one State to another, until
the transfer has been reported in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(c) unless the owner is in possession of the certificate or the
provisional order authorising the use of the boiler;
30 (d) at a pressure higher than the maximum pressure recorded in such
certificate or provisional order;
(e) where the Central Government has made rules requiring that boiler
shall be in the charge of persons holding certificates of proficiency or
competency, unless the boiler is in the charge of a person holding the
35 certificate required by such rules:
Provided that any boiler registered, or any boiler certified or licensed, under
any Act herebefore repealed, shall be deemed to have been registered or certified,
as the case may be, under this Act.
(2) The qualification and experience of persons intending to obtain a
40 certificate of proficiency or competency, fee and the procedure for obtaining such
certificate, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
12. (1) The owner of a boiler which is not registered under the provisions of Registration.
this Act shall make an application to the Inspector in such form, along with such
drawings, specification, certificate and other documents as may be specified by
45 regulations, to have the boiler registered.
(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Inspector shall
fix a date, within thirty days or such shorter period as may be prescribed by the
50 State Government, from the date of the receipt of the application, for examination
of the boiler and shall give the owner thereof not less than ten days’ notice of the
date so fixed.

(4) On the date so fixed under sub-section (3), the Inspector shall inspect the
boiler with a view to satisfying himself that the boiler has not suffered any damage
during its transit from the place of manufacture to the site of erection and forward
a report of the inspection along with the documents to the Chief Inspector within
seven days. 5
(5) The Chief Inspector, on receipt of the report under sub-section (4),
may—
(a) register the boiler and assign a register number thereto either
forthwith or after satisfying himself that any structural alteration, addition
or renewal which he may deem necessary has been made in or to the boiler 10
or any steam-pipe attached thereto; or
(b) refuse to register the boiler:
Provided that where the Chief Inspector refuses to register a boiler, he shall
forthwith communicate his refusal to the owner of the boiler together with the
reasons therefor.
(6) The Chief Inspector shall, on registration of the boiler, order the grant of
a certificate to the owner in such form as may be specified by regulations,
authorising the use of the boiler for a period not exceeding twelve months, at a
pressure not exceeding such maximum pressure as he thinks fit:
Provided that where an economiser or an unfired boiler forms an integral 20
part of such processing plant in which steam is generated solely by the use of oil,
asphalt or bitumen as a heating medium, the Chief Inspector may authorise the
use of such boiler for a period not exceeding twenty-four months.
(7) The Inspector shall forthwith convey to the owner of the boiler the order
of the Chief Inspector and shall in accordance therewith, grant a certificate to the 25
owner of which such grant has been ordered.
(8) On receipt of the boiler registration certificate, the owner shall cause the
register number to be permanently marked on the boiler in such manner and within
such time as may be specified by regulations.
(9) The transfer of boilers from one place to another within a State shall be 30
reported in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Renewal of
13. (1) A certificate authorising the use of a boiler shall cease to be in force,—
certificate.
(a) on the expiry of the period for which it was granted; or
(b) when any accident occurs to the boiler; or
(c) when the boiler is moved, except a vertical boiler, the heating 35
surface of which is less than twenty square metres, or a portable or vehicular
boiler; or
(d) save as provided in section 17, when any structural alteration,
addition or renewal is made in or to the boiler; or
(e) in case the Chief Inspector in any particular case so directs, when 40
any structural alteration, addition or renewal is made in or to any steam-pipe
attached to the boiler; or
(f) on the communication to the owner of the boiler of an order of the
Chief Inspector or the Inspector prohibiting its use on the ground that it or
any boiler components attached to it is in a dangerous condition. 45
(2) An order made under clause (f) of sub-section (1) shall contain the
grounds on which the order is made and the same shall be communicated to the
owner.

(3) When a certificate ceases to be in force, the owner of the boiler may
make an application to the competent person for renewal thereof in such form,
along with such documents and fee as may be specified by regulations.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (3), the competent person
5 shall, within fifteen days from the date of such receipt, inspect the boiler in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(5) If the competent person is,—
(a) satisfied that the boiler and the boiler components attached thereto
are in good condition, he shall grant a certificate for such period as may be
10 specified by regulations;
(b) of the opinion that the boiler or boiler components, or both, does
not conform to the standards as may be specified by regulations, he may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to grant the certificate:
Provided that no certificate shall be refused unless the inspecting authority
15 had directed the owner of the boiler or the boiler components, or both, in writing
to carry out such modifications or rectifications as it deems necessary and the
competent person is of the opinion that inspite of such direction, the owner of the
boiler or boiler components, or both, has not carried out the modifications or
rectifications:
20 Provided further that the competent person shall, within forty-eight hours of
making the inspection under sub-section (4), inform the owner of the boiler or
boiler components, or both, any defect or deficiency in his opinion and the reasons
therefor and shall forthwith inform the Chief Inspector about such defect or
deficiency.
25 (6) The Chief Inspector, on receipt of an information under sub-section (5),
may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the regulations made thereunder,
order the renewal of the certificate on such terms and conditions as may be
specified by regulations or may refuse to renew it:
Provided that where the Chief Inspector refuses to renew a certificate, he
30 shall forthwith communicate his refusal to the owner of the boiler, together with
the reasons therefor.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent an owner of a boiler
from applying for a renewal certificate therefor at any time during the currency of
a certificate.
35 14. (1) Where the Inspector reports the case of any boiler to the Chief Provisional
Inspector under sub-section (4) of section 12, he may, if the use of such boiler or order.
its components is not prohibited under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 13
as being in a dangerous condition, grant to the owner thereof a provisional order
in writing, permitting the boiler to be used at a pressure not exceeding such
40 maximum pressure as he thinks fit and is in accordance with the regulations made
under this Act, pending the receipt of the order of the Chief Inspector.
(2) Such provisional order shall cease to be in force—
(i) on the expiry of six months from the date on which it is granted; or
(ii) on receipt of the orders of the Chief Inspector; or
45 (iii) in any of the cases referred to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of
sub-section (1) of section 13,
and on so ceasing to be in force, shall be surrendered to the Inspector.
15. Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14, when the Use of boiler
period of a certificate relating to a boiler has expired, the owner shall, subject to pending grant of
certificate.
50 the condition that he has applied for renewal before the expiry of the period for

renewal of the certificate, be entitled to use the boiler at the maximum pressure
entered in that certificate pending the issue of orders on the renewal application
made under sub-section (3) of section 13.
16. The Chief Inspector may at any time withdraw or revoke any certificate
Revocation of
certificate or or provisional order on the report of an Inspector or otherwise,— 5
provisional
order. (a) if there is reason to believe that the certificate or provisional order
has been obtained fraudulently or has been granted erroneously or without
sufficient examination; or
(b) if the boiler in respect of which it has been granted has ceased to
be in good condition; or 10
(c) if the boiler is in the charge of a person not holding the certificate
of proficiency or competency referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 11.
Alteration and 17. No structural alteration, addition or renewal shall be made in or to any
renewal of
boiler. boiler registered under this Act unless such alteration, addition or renewal has 15
been authorised in writing by the Chief Inspector:
Provided that no such authorisation is required where the structural
alteration, addition or renewal is made under the supervision of a competent
person.
Alteration and 18. (1) Where the owner of any boiler registered under this Act intends to 20
renewal of make any structural alteration, addition or renewal in or to any steam-pipe or other
steam-pipe or boiler components attached to the boiler, he shall submit to the Chief Inspector a
boiler
report in writing of his intention and send therewith such particulars of proposed
components.
alteration, addition or renewal, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Any structural alteration, addition or renewal shall be made by a person 25
possessing a boiler repairer certificate under the supervision of the competent
person.
Duty of owner 19. (1) On any date fixed under this Act for the examination of a boiler or
at examination. boiler components, or both, the owner thereof shall be bound,—
(a) to afford to the competent person all reasonable facilities for the 30
examination and all such information as may reasonably be required of him;
(b) to have the boiler or boiler components, or both, properly prepared
and ready for examination in the such manner as may be specified by
regulations; and
(c) in case of an application for the registration of a boiler under 3 5
sub-section (1) of section 12, to provide to the competent person such
drawing, specification, certificate and other particulars as may be specified
by regulations.
(2) If the owner fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with the
provisions of sub-section (1), the competent person may refuse to make the 40
examination and report the matter to the Chief Inspector who shall, unless
sufficient cause to the contrary is shown, require the owner to file a fresh
application for registration or renewal of certificate for use of boiler and may
forbid him to use the boiler.
Production of 20. The owner of any boiler who holds a certificate or provisional order 45
certificate and relating thereto shall, at all reasonable times during the period for which the
provisional
certificate or order is in force, be bound to produce the same when called upon to
order.
do so by the District Magistrate, the Commissioner of Police or the Magistrate of
the first class, having jurisdiction in the area in which the boiler is for the time
being located, or by the Chief Inspector or Inspector or by any Inspector appointed 50
under the Factories Act, 1948 or by any person specially authorised in writing by 63 of 1948.
the District Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police.

21. Where any other person becomes the owner of a boiler during the period Transfer of
for which a certificate or provisional order relating thereto is in force, the certificate and
provisional
preceding owner or his legal heirs shall be bound to make over to him the
order.
certificate or provisional order.
5 22. An Inspector may, for the purposes of inspecting or examining a boiler Powers of entry
or any steam-pipe attached thereto or to ensure the compliance of the provisions of Inspector.
of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder, at all reasonable times, enter
any place or building within the limits of the area for which he has been appointed,
in which he has reason to believe that a boiler is in use.
10 23. (1) If any accident occurs to a boiler or boiler components, the owner or Report of
person in charge thereof shall within twenty-four hours of the accident, report the accident.
same in writing to the Inspector.
(2) Every such report shall contain a true description of the nature of the
accident and of the injury, if any, caused thereby to the boiler or to the boiler
15 components or to any person, and be detailed in such manner as to enable the
Inspector to judge the gravity of the accident.
(3) Every person shall be bound to answer truly to the best of his knowledge
and ability every question put to him in writing by the Inspector as to the cause,
nature or extent of the accident.
20 (4) The inquiry in respect of accident under this Act shall be made in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that where any death has occurred due to any accident to a boiler
or boiler components, an inquiry may be conducted by such person and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
25 CHAPTER IV
APPEAL
24. (1) Any person aggrieved by,— Appeal to Chief
Inspector.
(a) an order made by an Inspector in exercise of any power conferred
by or under this Act; or
30 (b) a refusal by an Inspector to make any order or to grant any
certificate which he is required or empowered by or under this Act, to make
or grant,
may, within thirty days from the date on which such order or refusal is
communicated to him, appeal against the order or refusal to the Chief Inspector.
35 (2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be made in such manner as may
be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal made under sub-section (1)
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
25. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 24 by the Appeal to
Central
40 Chief Inspector—
Government.
(a) refusing to register a boiler or to grant or renew a certificate in
respect of a boiler;
(b) refusing to grant a certificate having validity for the full period
applied for;
45 (c) refusing to grant a certificate authorising the use of a boiler at the
maximum desired pressure;

(d) withdrawing or revoking a certificate or provisional order;
(e) reducing the amount of pressure indicated in any certificate or the
period for which such certificate has been granted;
(f) ordering any structural alteration, addition or renewal to be made
in or to a boiler or steam-pipe; or 5
(g) refusing sanction to the making of any structural alteration,
addition or renewal to be made in or to a boiler or steam-pipe,
may, within thirty days of the communication to him of such order, prefer an
appeal to the Central Government in such form and manner, within such time and
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 10
(2) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of an inspecting authority to grant
a certificate of inspection of manufacture or erection may, within thirty days from
the date of communication of such refusal, prefer an appeal to the Central
Government.
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be 15
prescribed by the Central Government.
Application for 26. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government made
revision of under section 25 may, within sixty days of the communication to him of such
order.
order, make an application to the Central Government for a revision of its order.
(2) Every application for revision of order under this section shall be made 20
in such form and manner, within such time and on payment of such fee as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Minor penalties. 27. Any owner of a boiler who refuses or without reasonable excuse fails,— 25
(i) to surrender a provisional order as required by sub-section (2) of
section 14; or
(ii) to produce a certificate or provisional order when duly called upon
to do so under section 20; or
(iii) to make over to the new owner of a boiler a certificate or 30
provisional order as required by section 21; or
(iv) to report an accident to a boiler or boiler components when so
required under section 23,
shall be liable to penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Penalties for 28. Any owner of a boiler who,—
illegal use of
boiler. (a) in any case in which a certificate or provisional order is required
for the use of the boiler under this Act, uses the boiler either without any
such certificate or order, or at a higher pressure than that allowed
thereby; or
(b) uses or permits to be used a boiler which has been transferred from 40
one State to another without such transfer having been reported as required
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 11; or
(c) fails to cause the register number allotted to the boiler under
this Act to be permanently marked on the boiler as required under
sub-section (8) of section 12, 45
shall be liable to penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of
a continuing contravention, with an additional penalty which may extend to one
thousand rupees for each day after the first day during which the contravention
continues.

29. Any person who,— Punishment for
certain offences.
(a) makes any structural alteration, addition or renewal in or to a boiler
without first obtaining the authorisation of the Chief Inspector when so
required by section 17, or to a steam-pipe without first informing the Chief
5 Inspector under section 18; or
(b) tampers with a safety valve of a boiler so as to render it inoperative
at the maximum pressure at which the use of the boiler is authorised under
this Act; or
(c) allows another person to go inside a boiler without effectively
10 disconnecting the same from any steam or hot water connection with any
other boiler or from fuel mains, in accordance with the regulations made
under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
15 30. (1) Whoever removes, alters, defaces, renders invisible or otherwise Penalty for
tampers with the register number marked on a boiler in accordance with the tampering with
provisions of this Act, shall be liable to penalty which may extend to one lakh register mark.
rupees.
(2) Whoever fraudulently marks upon a boiler a register number which has
20 not been assigned to it under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees,
or with both.
31. Any rule or regulation made under this Act may direct that a person Penalty for
contravening such rule or regulation shall be liable, in the case of a first breach of rules
25 contravention, with penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees and in the or regulations.
case of any subsequent contravention, with penalty which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
32. (1) All penalties, fines and costs levied under this Act shall be Recovery of
recoverable as arrears of land-revenue. penalties.
30 (2) The penalties, fines and costs levied under this Act shall be utilised in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
33. No prosecution for an offence made punishable by or under this Act Limitation and
shall be instituted except within twenty-four months from the date of the previous
sanction for
commission of the offence and no such prosecution shall be instituted without the
prosecution.
35 previous sanction of the Chief Inspector.
34. No offence made punishable by or under this Act shall be tried by a court Trial of
inferior to that of a Magistrate of the first class. offences.
35. (1) The State Government or the Union territory administration may, for Adjudication of
the purposes of determining the penalties under sections 27, 28, sub-section (1) of penalties.
40 section 30 and section 31, authorise the District Magistrate or the Additional
District Magistrate having jurisdiction, to be the adjudicating officer to hold an
inquiry and impose penalty, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government or the Central Government, as the case may be.
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and enforce the attendance of any
45 person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence
or to produce any document, which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may
be useful for, or relevant to, the subject-matter of the inquiry, and if, on such
inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply with any or
all of the provisions of section 27 or section 28 or sub-section (1) of section 30 or
50 section 31, he may by an order, impose penalty on such person stating therein the
contravention:

Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the person
concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Appeal against 36. (1) Any person aggrieved by the order passed by the adjudicating officer
orders of under section 35, may prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank of
adjudicating
Secretary to the State Government or the Union territory administration specially 5
officer.
authorised by that Government or administration in this behalf, to be an appellate
authority, within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government or the Central Government,
as the case may be.
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period of sixty days if 10
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within that period.
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the parties to the appeal an
opportunity of being heard, pass such order as he may think fit.
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within sixty days 15
from the date of filing of the appeal.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
Power of 37. The Central Government may give such directions as it may deem
Central necessary, to a State Government for carrying into effect any of the provisions to 20
Government to
this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions.
give directions.
Exemptions.
38. (1) The State Government may, by notification, exclude any area as may
be specified therein, from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, exempt from the operation
of this Act, subject to such conditions and restrictions as it thinks fit, any boiler 25
or class or type of boilers used exclusively for the heating of buildings or the
supply of hot water.
(3) In case of any emergency, the State Government may, by general or
special order in writing, exempt any boiler or steam-pipe or any class of boilers
or steam-pipes from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 30
(4) If the State Government is satisfied that having regard to the material,
design or construction of boilers and to the need for the rapid industrialisation of
the country, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification and subject to such
conditions as may be specified by regulations, exempt any boiler or boiler
components in the whole or any part of the State from the operation of all or any 35
of the provisions of this Act.
Power of 39. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry
Central out the provisions of this Act.
Government to
make rules. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 40
(a) the term of office of the members and the manner of their
nomination under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) the qualifications and experience of Technical Adviser under
sub-section (1) of section 4;
(c) the salary and allowances and terms and conditions of service of 45
Technical Adviser under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(d) the qualifications and experience of Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief
Inspectors and Inspectors under sub-section (5) of section 5;

(e) the boiler which shall be in the charge of persons holding certificate
of proficiency or competency under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 11;
(f) the qualifications, experience, fee and the procedure for
5 obtaining a certificate of proficiency or competency under sub-section (2)
of section 11;
(g) the person who shall conduct inquiry and the manner of conducting
such inquiry into the accident causing death under the proviso to
sub-section (4) of section 23;
10 (h) the form, manner, time and fee for preferring appeal to the Central
Government under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(i) the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-section (3) of
section 25;
(j) the form, manner, time and fee for filing revision application under
15 sub-section (2) of section 26;
(k) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty under
sub-section (1) of section 35;
(l) the form and manner of preferring appeal under sub-section (1) of
section 36.
20 40. (1) The Board may, by notification and subject to the condition of Power of Board
previous publication, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules to make
regulations.
made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
25 namely:—
(a) the manner of recognition of person as competent person under
clause (g) of section 2;
(b) the manner of recognition of institution as inspecting authority
under clause (j) of section 2;
30 (c) the manner of recognition of competent authority under sub-section (1)
of section 6;
(d) the welders certificate under sub-section (2) of section 6;
(e) the procedure for examination and grant of welders certificate
under sub-section (3) of section 6;
(f) the other conditions and fee and for grant of welders certificate
under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(g) the facilities for design and construction of boiler and boiler
components under clause (a) of section 7;
(h) the specifications for material, mounting and fitting used in the
40 construction of boiler or boiler components under clause (c) of section 7;
(i) the stages of inspection during manufacture of boiler or boiler
components by the inspecting authority under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(j) the procedure for inspection and certification of boiler or boiler
components by the inspecting authority under sub-section (2) of section 8;
45 (k) the standard for design and drawing of boiler or boiler components
under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 8;
(l) the fee for inspection of boiler or boiler components during
manufacture under sub-section (4) of section 8;

(m) the procedure for inspection and certification of a boiler or boiler
components during erection under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(n) the standards for erection of a boiler; and the form of certificate of
inspection under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 9;
(o) the fee payable for inspection during erection under sub-section (4) 5
of section 9;
(p) the facilities for repairing of boiler and boiler components under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(q) the standards for design and drawings of the boiler or boiler
components, and the specifications for material, mounting and fitting 10
used in the repair of the boiler or boiler components, under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 10;
(r) the measures for the safety of person working inside a boiler under
clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(s) the manner of obtaining a certificate under sub-section (2) of 15
section 10;
(t) the manner of reporting of transfer of boiler under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 11;
(u) the form along with the drawings, specification, certificate and
other documents for registration under sub-section (1) of section 12; 20
(v) the form for grant of certificate to the owner authorising the use of
the boiler under sub-section (6) of section 12;
(w) the manner and time in which the register number shall be marked
on the boiler under sub-section (8) of section 12;
(x) the form, documents and fee for renewal of certificate under 2 5
sub-section (3) of section 13;
(y) the manner for inspection of the boiler under sub-section (4) of
section 13;
(z) the validity period of the certificate under clause (a) of sub-section (5)
of section 13; 30
(za) the standards for boiler or boiler components under clause (b) of
sub-section (5) of section 13;
(zb) the terms and conditions for the renewal of certificate under
sub-section (6) of section 13;
(zc) the particulars of proposed alteration, addition or renewal of 35
steam-pipe and other boiler components under sub-section (1) of section 18;
(zd) the manner of preparation of the boiler or boiler components for
examination under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 19;
(ze) the drawing, specification, certificate and other particulars to be
provided to the competent person under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 40
section 19;
(zf) the manner of disconnecting the boiler under clause (c) of
section 29;
(zg) the conditions for exemption of any boiler or boiler components
under sub-section (4) of section 38; 45

(zh) for any other matter relating to design, manufacture, erection
and use of boiler and boiler components which is to be regulated by the
Board.
41. Every rule made by the Central Government under section 39 and Rules and
regulations to be
every regulation made by the Board under section 40 shall be laid, as soon as
laid before
5 may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
Parliament.
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
10 Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule or regulation.
15 42. (1) The State Government may, by notification and subject to the Power of State
condition of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Act and Government to
make rules.
regulations made thereunder for all or any of the following provisions,
namely:—
(a) the powers and duties of the Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief
Inspectors and Inspectors under sub-section (8) of section 5;
(b) the fee payable for registration of boiler under sub-section (2) of
section 12;
(c) the period within which Inspector shall be required to examine
the boiler under sub-section (3) of section 12;
(d) the manner of reporting transfer of boilers from one place to
25 another within State under sub-section (9) of section 12;
(e) the manner of inquiry in respect of an accident under
sub-section (4) of section 23;
(f) the manner for making appeals under sub-section (2) of
section 24;
(g) the procedure for disposing of appeals under sub-section (3) of
section 24;
(h) the manner in which the penalties, fines and costs levied under
this Act shall be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 32;
(i) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty under
sub-section (1) of section 35; and
35 (j) the form and manner of preferring appeal under sub-section (1)
of section 36.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
43. An order of the Central Government under sections 25 and 26, or of Finality of
orders.
the Chief Inspector, or of a Deputy Chief Inspector, or of an Inspector, shall be
final and shall not be called in question in any court.
44. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, Power to
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make remove
difficulties.
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
45 Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

Repeal and 45. (1) The Boilers Act, 1923 is hereby repealed. 5 of 1923.
savings.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or exemption
issued, made or granted under the Act so repealed shall have effect as if it
had been issued, made or granted under the provisions of this Act, till new 5
notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or exemption is issued, made
or granted under this Act;
(b) any office established or created, officer appointed and any body
constituted under the Act so repealed shall continue and shall be deemed to
have been established, created, appointed or constituted under this Act; 10
(c) any document referring to the Act so repealed shall be construed
as referring to this Act or to the provision of this Act;
(d) any fine or penalty levied under the Act so repealed may be
recovered as if it had been levied under this Act;
(e) any offence committed under the Act so repealed may be 15
prosecuted and punished as if it had been committed under this Act;
(f) any boiler registered under the Act so repealed shall be deemed to
have been registered under this Act;
(g) any certificate of competency or proficiency, exemption, or any
other certificate or document issued, made or granted under the Act so 20
repealed and in force at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
have been issued, made or granted under this Act and shall, unless cancelled
under this Act, continue in force until the date shown in the certificate or
document, as the case may be;
(h) any proceeding pending before any court under the Act so repealed 25
may be tried or disposed of under the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(i) the offices existing under the Act so repealed at the commencement
of this Act shall continue as if they have been established under this Act;
(j) any person appointed under or by virtue of the Act here by repealed
shall be deemed to have been appointed to that office under or by virtue of 30
this Act;
(k) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under
the provisions of the Act so repealed shall continue to be proceeded with as
if such inspection, investigation or inquiry is ordered to be done under the
corresponding provisions of this Act. 35
(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with 10 of 1897.
regard to the effect of repeals.
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid Act, the Board constituted
under the Act so repealed shall continue to function till a new Board is constituted 40
under this Act.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Boilers Act, 1923 (the 1923 Act) was enacted with the objective of
ensuring uniformity throughout India in all technical aspects pertaining to the
regulation of boilers. This included standards of construction, maximum pressure
specifications as well as the registration and periodic inspection of all boilers with
particular focus on matters concerning the safety of life and property.
2. Recently, the Government of India has initiated a comprehensive
examination of pre-Constitutional Acts to assess their relevance and suitability in
the contemporary context. In this context, the 1923 Act was examined and it has
been considered necessary to review the provisions of the said Act. As a result, it
is felt necessary, inter alia, to remove redundant or obsolete provisions; introduce
certain substantive provisions to enable framing of the rules and regulations that
were previously lacking and to define certain terms and expressions. These
modifications aim to enhance the clarity of the provisions of the Bill.
3. Therefore, it is considered necessary to repeal the 1923 Act and for that
purpose to introduce the Boilers Bill, 2024 in Parliament. The Bill seeks to
provide for the regulation of the manufacture and use of boilers, ensuring the
safety of life and property of persons from the danger of explosions of boilers. It
further prohibits the use of unregistered and uncertified boilers, mandates
reporting of accidents and promotes uniformity in the registration and inspection
processes throughout the manufacturing, erection and use of the boilers in the
country. The Bill also proposes independent third-party inspecting authorities for
inspection and certification purposes.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;
The 6th August, 2024. PIYUSH GOYAL.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill such
as “Board”, “boiler”, “boiler component”, “competent authority”, “competent
person”, “economiser”, “feed-pipe”, “inspecting authority”, etc.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to constitute
the Central Boilers Board and the Secretary to the Government of India in charge
of the Department having administrative control of the Board shall be its
Chairperson, ex officio.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to appoint
the Technical Adviser.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Governments to appoint the
Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide for the recognition of the competent
authority for the grant of certificate to the welders for welding of boiler and boiler
components.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain conditions which are to be
complied with before initiation of manufacture of boiler and boiler components.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide for the inspection of boiler and boiler
components during manufacture.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide for the inspection of boiler and boiler
components during erection.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain conditions precedent for
repairing boiler and boiler components.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for the prohibition of use of
unregistered or uncertified boiler.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide for the registration of boiler.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide for the renewal of certificate for the
use of boiler.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide for the grant of provisional order
permitting the use of the boiler.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to provide for using the boiler, pending renewal
of certificate for use of boiler, subject to the conditions specified therein.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to empower the Chief Inspector to withdraw or
revoke any certificate or provisional order, for the use of boiler in certain
circumstances specified therein.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide for the authorisation of Chief
Inspector for making any alteration and renewal of boiler.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to provide for submission of written report by
the owner to the Chief Inspector about his intention to make any structural
alteration, addition or renewal of the steam-pipe or boiler components.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain duties of the owner of a
boiler at the time of examination of a boiler by the competent person.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide that the owner of a boiler shall produce
the certificate of registration or the provisional order for the use of the boiler, on
demand to the District Magistrate, the Commissioner of Police or the Magistrate
of the first class or any other authorised officer having jurisdiction in the area.

Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to provide that in case of transfer of ownership,
the preceding owner shall be bound to transfer the certificate or the provisional
order to the new owner.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to empower any Inspector to enter any place or
building for the purposes of inspection of boiler.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide that in case of any accident, the owner
or the person in charge of the boiler shall be bound to make a report to the
Inspector within twenty-four hours. It further provides for the manner of
conducting inquiries into accidents by State Governments and the Central
Government.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide for an appeal to the Chief Inspector
against an order of Inspector.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide for an appeal to the Central
Government against the order of the Chief Inspector.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide an opportunity to any aggrieved
person for making an application to the Central Government for revision of its
order made under clause 25.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide for minor penalties for breach of
certain provisions of the Bill as specified therein.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to make liable to penalty any illegal use of boiler
in the manner specified therein.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to make punishable certain offences specified
therein.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to make liable to penalty for tampering with
register mark of the boiler.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to make breach of rules and regulations liable to
penalty.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide for the mode of recovery and manner
of utilisation of penalties, fines and costs under the Bill and the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide for limitation period within which a
prosecution may be instituted under the Bill and provides for previous sanction of
the Chief Inspector for instituting a prosecution.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide that an offence committed under the
Bill shall be tried by a court which is not inferior to that of the Magistrate of the
first class.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide for adjudication of penalties under
certain provisions of the Bill specified therein, by an adjudicating officer.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide for an appeal against the orders of
adjudicating officer.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to give
directions to the State Governments.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Governments to exempt
any area or boiler from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Boilers Board to make
regulations to carry out the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for laying of rules and regulations
made under clause 39 and clause 40, before Parliament.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to empower State Governments to make rules to
carry out the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide for finality of orders made by the
Central Government under clauses 25 and 26 of the Bill, or by the Chief Inspector
or Deputy Chief Inspector or Inspector.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to remove
any difficulty, within a period of three years, for giving effect to the provisions of
the Bill.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal of the Boilers Act, 1923
and for saving of certain actions taken theresunder.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Central Boilers
Board, inter alia, for the purposes of regulating the design, manufacture, erection
and use of boiler and boiler components.
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Technical Adviser
for exercising the powers and discharging the functions and under the Bill.
3. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Chief Inspector,
Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors for exercising the powers and performing
the duties under the Bill.
4. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the competent authority for the grant of
certificate to the welders for welding of boiler and boiler components.
5. The expenditure that would be involved if the Bill is enacted and brought
into operation, are the existing expenditure and will not involve any additional
expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 of the Bill empowers the Central Government,
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These
matters include (a) the term of office of the members and the manner of their
nomination under sub-clause (3) of clause 3; (b) the qualifications and experience
of Technical Adviser under sub-clause (1) of clause 4; (c) the salary and
allowances and terms and conditions of service of Technical Adviser under
sub-clause (2) of clause 4; (d) the qualifications and experience of Chief Inspector,
Deputy Chief Inspectors and Inspectors under sub-clause (5) of clause 5; (e) the
boilers which shall be in the charge of persons holding certificate of proficiency
or competency under sub-clause (1) (e) of clause 11; (f) the qualifications,
experience, fee and the procedure for obtaining a certificate of proficiency or
competency under sub-clause (2) of clause 11; (g) the person who shall conduct
inquiry and the manner of conducting such inquiry into the accident under
sub-clause (4) of clause 23; (h) the form, manner, time and fee for preferring
appeal to the Central Government under sub-clause (1) of clause 25; (i) the
procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-clause (3) of clause 25; (j) the
form, manner, time and fee for filing revision application under sub-clause (2) of
clause 26; (k) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty under
sub-clause (1) of clause 35 and (l) the form and manner of preferring appeal under
sub-clause (1) of clause 36.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 40 of the Bill empowers the Central Boilers
Board, to make regulations to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may
be made. These matters include (a) the manner of recognition of person as
competent person under clause 2 (g); (b) the manner of recognition of institution
as inspecting authority under clause 2 (j); (c) the manner for recognition of
competent authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 6; (d) the welders certificate
under sub-clause (2) of clause 6; (e) the procedure for examination and grant of
welders certificate under sub-clause (3) of clause 6; (f) the other conditions and
fee and for grant of welders certificate under sub-clause (4) of clause 6; (g) the
facilities for design and construction of boiler and boiler components under
clause 7(a); (h) the specifications of material mounting and fitting, used in the
construction of boiler or boiler components under clause 7 (c); (i) the stages of
inspection during manufacture of boiler or boiler components by the inspecting
authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 8; (j) the procedure for inspection and
certification of boiler or boiler components by the inspecting authority under
sub-clause (2) of clause 8; (k) the standard for design and drawing of boiler or
boiler components under sub-clause (3)(a) of clause 8; (l) the fee for inspection
of boiler or boiler components during manufacture under sub-clause (4) of
clause 8; (m) the procedure for inspection and certification of a boiler or boiler
components during erection under sub-clause (2) of clause 9; (n) the standards for
erection of a boiler; and the form of certificate of inspection under
sub-clause (3)(a) of clause 9; (o) the fee payable for inspection during erection
under sub-clause (4) of clause 9; (p) the facilities for repairing of the boiler and
boiler components under sub-clause (1) (a) of clause 10; (q) the standards for
design and drawings of the boiler or boiler components, and the material,
mounting and fitting used in the repair of the boiler or boiler components under
sub-clause (1) (b) of clause 10; (r) the measures for the safety of persons working
inside a boiler under sub-clause (1) (f) of clause 10; (s) the manner of obtaining a
certificate under sub-clause (2) of clause 10; (t) the manner of reporting of transfer
of boiler under sub-clause (1) (b) of clause 11; (u) the form along with the
drawings, specification, certificate and other documents for registration under
sub-clause (1) of clause 12; (v) the form for grant of certificate to the owner
authorising the use of the boiler under sub-clause (6) of clause 12; (w) the manner

and time in which the register number shall be marked on the boiler under
sub-clause (8) of clause 12; (x) the form, documents and fee for renewal of
certificate under sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (y) the manner for inspection of the
boiler under sub-clause (4) of clause 13; (z) the validity period of the certificate
under sub-clause (5)(a) of clause 13; (za) the standards for boiler or boiler
components under sub-clause (5)(b) of clause 13; (zb) the terms and conditions
for the renewal of certificate under sub-clause (6) of clause 13; (zc) the particulars
of proposed alteration, addition or renewal of steam-pipe and other boiler
components under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (zd) the manner for examination
of the boiler or boiler components under sub-clause (1)(b) of clause 19; (ze) the
drawing, specification, certificate and other particulars to be provided to the
competent person under sub-clause (1)(c) of clause 19; (zf) the manner of
disconnecting the boiler under clause 29 (c); (zg) the conditions for exemption of
any boiler or boiler components under sub-clause (4) of clause 38; and (zh) any
other matter relating to design, manufacture, erection and use of boiler and boiler
components which are to be regulated by the Board.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 42 of the Bill empowers the State Government
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These
matters include (a) the powers and duties of the Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief
Inspectors and Inspectors under sub-clause (8) of clause 5; (b) the fee payable for
registration of boiler under sub clause (2) of clause 12; (c) the period within which
Inspector shall be required to examine the boiler under sub-clause (3) of
clause 12; (d) the manner of reporting transfer of boilers from one place to another
within a State under sub-clause (9) of clause 12; (e) the manner of inquiry in
respect of an accident under sub-clause (4) of clause 23; (f) the manner for making
appeals under sub-clause (2) of clause 24; (g) the procedure for disposing of
appeals under sub-clause (3) of clause 24; (h) the manner in which the penalties,
fines and costs levied under this Act shall be utilised under sub-clause (2) of
clause 32; (i) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalty under
sub-clause (1) of clause 35; and (j) the form and manner of preferring appeal under
sub-clause (1) of clause 36.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made under
the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it
is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of boilers, safety of life and property of persons from
the danger of explosions of steam-boilers and for uniformity in registration
and inspection during manufacture, erection and use of boilers in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Piyush Goyal, Minister of Commerce and Industry)