AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 104 of 2024
THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION OF SCHEDULED
TRIBES IN ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES OF THE STATE OF
GOA BILL, 2024
A
BILL
for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the Constitution
for effective democratic participation of members of Scheduled Tribes and to
provide for the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State
of Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of certain
communities in the list of the Scheduled Tribes in the State of Goa and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Readjustment of Representation of Short title and
Scheduled Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Act, 2024. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(a) “Census Commissioner” means the Census Commissioner appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Census Act, 1948;
37 of 1948.

(b) “Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in
article 324 of the Constitution;
(c) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 2002; 33 of 2002.
(d) “Delimitation Order” means the Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008; 5
(e) “last census” means the census held in India in 2001;
(f) “Scheduled Tribes Orders” means the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union C. O. 19.
Territories) Order, 1951, as amended from time to time, made by the President C. O. 32.
under article 342 of the Constitution; 10
(g) “State” means the State of Goa.
Estimation of 3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the population
population of as at the last census of the Scheduled Tribes in the State shall be ascertained or
Scheduled
estimated by the Census Commissioner.
Tribes.
(2) Where by reason of the amendments made in the Scheduled Tribes 15
Orders after the last census and up to the date of commencement of this Act, the
population of the Scheduled Tribes as at the last census is varied in the State, the
Census Commissioner shall ascertain or estimate as on the date of such
commencement, the population of the Scheduled Tribes so varied, and also
ascertain or estimate the proportion of such population of the Scheduled Tribes to 20
the total population of the State.
(3) The population figures ascertained or estimated under sub-section (2) shall
be notified by the Census Commissioner in the Gazette of India.
(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the relevant
population figures and shall replace any figures previously published as ascertained 25
or estimated at the last census; and the figures so notified shall be final and shall not
be called in question in any court.
Readjustment of 4. (1) After the population figures have been notified for the State under
seats by section 3, the Commission shall make such amendments as may be necessary in the
Commission.
Delimitation Order, having regard to the provisions of articles 170 and 332 of the 30
Constitution, of section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and of this Act, for the purpose
of giving proper representation to the Scheduled Tribes of the State, and the Second
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have 43 of 1950.
been amended accordingly.
(2) In making any amendments in the Delimitation Order under 3 5
sub-section (1), the Commission shall, as far as may be necessary, have regard to
the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act.
(3) The Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette of India and
the Official Gazette of the State and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 40
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will be further
considered by it;
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified and for such consideration hold one
or more public sittings at such place or places in the State as it thinks fit; and 45
(d) thereafter make necessary amendments in the Delimitation Order.

5. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall Procedure and
determine its own procedure and shall have all the powers of a civil court under the powers of
Commission.
5 of 1908. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
5 (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b) requiring the production of any document; and
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person to furnish any
information on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be
10 useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
46 of 2023. sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
(4) For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits
of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India.
15 6. (1) The Commission shall cause the amendments made by it in the Publication of
Delimitation Order to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette amendments and
their dates of
of the State.
operation.
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment shall have
the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court.
20 (3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of India, every
such amendment shall be laid before the House of the People and the Legislative
Assembly of the State.
(4) Subject to any law that may govern readjustment and subject to the
provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly
of the State necessitated by any amendments made by the Commission in the
Delimitation Order and provided for in that Order as so amended shall apply in
relation to every election to the Assembly, held after the publication of such
amendments in the Gazette of India and shall so apply in supersession of the
provisions relating to representation as provided in the Representation of the
43 of 1950. 30 People Act, 1950.
(5) Nothing in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect the representation in the
Legislative Assembly of the State until the dissolution of the Assembly, existing on
the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the amendments in the Delimitation
Order made by the Commission.
35 7. (1) The Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette Certain other
of India and in the Official Gazette of the State,— powers of
Commission.
(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation Order as amended
under this Act, or any error occurring therein from any inadvertent slip or
omission; and
40 (b) where the boundaries or the name of any district or any territorial
division mentioned in the said Order are or is altered, make such amendments
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is issued, before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the
45 State.

Power to remove 8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
difficulties.
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 5
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government has received multiple representations from various sources,
with a request to direct the initiation of the process to identify and determine the
seats to provide for reservation to the Scheduled Tribes community in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa, as the same is not presently available to
them. Since, the exercise of delimitation was initiated in the year 2002, the
population of the Schedules Tribes in the State of Goa was recorded at that time in
the census figures of the year 2001 as only 566, whereas the total population of the
State of Goa was more than thirteen lakhs, the Scheduled Tribes communities of
Goa, were not able to avail the benefit of reservations of seats as per the Constitution
for their communities in the Legislative Assembly.
2. Subsequently, three new communities, namely, Kunbi, Gawda and Velip
were included in the List of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Goa vide the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders) Amendment Act,
2003 which increased the number of Scheduled Tribes population in the State
considerably. Thus, a peculiar situation has arisen in the State, wherein the
population of the Scheduled Tribes in the State vis-à-vis the population of Scheduled
Castes is considerably higher (as per the Primary Census Abstract, 2011 for the State
of Goa, the Total Population was 14,58,545; the population of Scheduled Castes
was 25,449 and the population of Scheduled Tribes was 1,49,275) but no seats are
reserved for Scheduled Tribes and they are unable to avail the constitutional benefit
of reservation afforded to them by article 332.
3. Further, there is no provision in the Representation of the People Act, 1950
or in the Representation of the People Act, 1951, or in the Delimitation Act, 2002,
enabling the Election Commission to carry out further delimitation of constituencies
or to determine constituencies for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in
the States/Union territories where the delimitation exercise was carried out by the
Delimitation Commission constituted under the Delimitation Act, 2002 and in terms
of the provisions of the Constitution on the basis of 2001 census.
4. The Delimitation Commission has since ceased to exist after completion of
its assigned task in the year 2008. Under articles 82 and 170 of the Constitution,
further delimitation stands frozen until the figures for the first census taken after the
year 2026 have been published. Therefore, no readjustment of seats can be
undertaken to provide the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Tribes in the State
of Goa where the population of the Scheduled Tribes has increased considerably as
per 2011 census vis-à-vis 2001 census figures.
5. Therefore, it is imperative to enact a law to provide for enabling provisions
empowering the Election Commission of India to make amendments in the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 and
readjust the seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa for the Scheduled
Tribes of the State.
6. In view of the above, it has been decided to introduce in Parliament a Bill
for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the Constitution
for effective democratic participation of members of Scheduled Tribes and to
provide for the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of certain
communities in the list of the Scheduled Tribes in the State of Goa and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;
The 29th July, 2024. ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted, does not involve any expenditure either recurring or
non-recurring from and out of the consolidated fund of India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill confers powers upon the Election
Commission to make necessary amendments it in the Delimitation Order having
regard to the relevant provisions of the Constitution, the Delimitation Act and the
provisions of this Bill.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill confers powers upon the Election
Commission to make, by notification, correction of printing mistake or any error in
the Delimitation Order and also to make necessary amendments therein, pursuant to
any change in boundaries and name of any district or territorial division.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill confers powers upon the Central
Government to issue orders to remove any difficulty which may arise to give effect
to the provisions of the proposed enactment within a period of two years.
4. The notification issued by the Election Commission shall be laid, as soon
as, it is issued, before each House of Parliament and before the Legislative
Assembly of the State. The order made by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as, it is issued, before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which the notification may be issued or the order
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the Constitution
for effective democratic participation of members of Scheduled Tribes and
to provide for the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of
certain communities in the list of the Scheduled Tribes in the State of Goa
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, Minister of State (I/C) for Law and Justice and
Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs)