AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH AUGUST, 2024
Bill No. LII of 2024
THE OILFIELDS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
Short title and
Amendment Act, 2024. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
53 of 1948. 2. In the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (hereinafter
Amendment of
referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,–– section 3.
(i)clause (b) shall be omitted;

(ii)for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(c) “mineral oils” means any naturally occurring hydrocarbon,
whether in the form of natural gas or in a liquid, viscous or solid form, or a
mixture thereof, and includes crude oil, natural gas, petroleum, condensate,
coal bed methane, oil shale, shale gas, shale oil, tight gas, tight oil, gas 5
hydrate in their usual industrial connotation and other gases occurring in
association with mineral oils, but does not include coal, lignite and helium
occurring in association with petroleum or coal or shale;’;
(iii) in clause (d), after the word “license”, the words, brackets and
figures “granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and 10
Development) Amendment Act, 2024” shall be inserted;
(iv) in clause (e), for the words “natural gas and petroleum, crude oil”,
the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted;
(v)after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(f) “petroleum lease” means a lease granted on or after the 15
commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
Amendment Act, 2024, for the purpose of prospecting, exploration,
development, production, making merchantable, carrying away or
disposing of mineral oils or for purposes connected therewith, and includes
a mining lease granted before the commencement of the said Act.’. 20
Amendment of 3. In section 4 of the principal Act,––
section 4.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “mining lease”, the words
“petroleum lease” shall be substituted;
(b)for the words “mining lease” at both the places where they occur, the
words “petroleum lease” shall be substituted. 25
4.After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
Insertion of new
section 4A. namely:––
Prospecting, etc., “4A. No person shall undertake any operation in any part of India or in
of mineral oils. its territorial waters, continental shelf and exclusive economic zone for the
purposes of prospecting, exploration, development or production, making 30
merchantable, carrying away or disposing of mineral oils, except under a valid
lease granted under this Act and the rules made thereunder:
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any operation
undertaken in any area in accordance with the terms and conditions of a license
or lease granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and 35
Development) Amendment Act, 2024.”.
Amendment of 5.In section 5 of the principal Act,––
section 5.
(A) in the marginal heading, for the words “mining leases”, the words
“petroleum leases” shall be substituted;
(B) in sub-section (1), for the words “grant of mining leases or for 40
prohibiting the grant”, the words “grant or extension or renewal of petroleum
leases or for prohibiting the grant or extension or renewal” shall be substituted;
(C)in sub-section (2),––
(i)in clause (a), for the words “mining leases”, the words “petroleum
leases” shall be substituted; 45
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “mining leases may be granted”, the
words “petroleum leases may be granted or extended or renewed” shall be
substituted;

(iii)for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:––
“(c) the maximum or minimum area of the petroleum leases;
(ca) the period for which any petroleum lease may be granted
or extended or renewed;
(cb) the terms on which petroleum leases may be merged or
combined;”;
(iv) in clause (d), for the word “mine”, the word “oilfield” shall be
substituted;
(v)after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
10 “(e) the mechanism to enable resolution of disputes arising out
of, or in relation to the petroleum leases or any authorisation granted
by the Central Government for working of an oilfield through
alternative dispute resolution methods under any law for the time
being in force, in a place within India or outside India;
15 (f)any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by
rules or in respect of which provision is to be made under this
section.”;
(D) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
20 “(3) The terms and conditions of a petroleum lease shall remain stable
during the period of the lease for expeditious and efficient development of
oilfields or production of mineral oils and shall not be altered to the
disadvantage of the lessee during the period of the lease.”.
6.In section 6 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 6.
25 (A) in the marginal heading, for the word “mineral”, the words
“mineral oils” shall be substituted;
(B) in sub-section (1), for the words “conservation and development”,
the words “exploration, development, production and conservation” shall be
substituted;
30 (C)in sub-section (2),––
(i)in clause (d),––
(a)for the words “oil wells”, the words “mineral oil wells and
decommissioning and site restoration activities” shall be substituted;
(b) for the word “oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be
35 substituted;
(ii)in clause (e), for the word “oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be
substituted;
(iii)in clause (g), for the word “mines”, the word “oilfields” shall be
substituted;
40 (iv)after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ga) the collection, aggregation, dissemination, use or sharing
of the data and samples related to mineral oils with the Central
Government or any other party nominated by the Central
Government, for the purposes of economic development, academic
45 research and public welfare;”;

(v) in clause (i), for the words “mined, quarried, excavated or
collected”, the word “produced” shall be substituted;
(vi)in clause (j), for the words “owners or lessees of mines of special
or periodical returns and reports, and the forms”, the words “lessees of
oilfields of special or periodical returns and reports, and the formats” shall 5
be substituted;
(vii)after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(k) the sharing of production and processing facilities and other
infrastructure, both on land and offshore, by two or more lessees for
more efficient development of oilfields or production of mineral oils; 10
(l)the safety at oilfields including safety mechanisms, standards
and protocols for conduct of mineral oil operations, protection of
persons and infrastructure such as terminals, installations, other
structures and devices, and mineral oils;
(m) the sound management of mineral oils in accordance with 15
good international petroleum industry practices including obligations
of lessees towards protection of environment during operations and
while abandoning, decommissioning and undertaking site restoration
activities;
(n)the unitisation of leases across States, Union territories and 20
offshore leases, where there is reservoir continuity or connectivity, or
for efficient exploration, development or production of mineral oils;
(o) promote and facilitate adoption of measures for reducing
carbon and greenhouse gas emissions and decarbonising operations
including but not limited to use of oilfields for other purposes, such 25
as, production of hydrogen, carbon capture utilisation and storage or
coal gasification;
(p)reporting of carbon and greenhouse gas emissions related to,
arising out of, or resulting from mineral oil operations;
(q) promote and facilitate development of comprehensive 30
energy projects at oilfields, including planning, development,
installation, sharing and use of infrastructure for carrying out mineral
oil operations and solar, wind or other form of renewable energy
projects;
(r)any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by 35
rules, or in respect of which provision is to be made under this
section.”.
Amendment of 7.In section 6A of the principal Act,––
section 6A.
(a)for the words “mined, quarried, excavated” wherever they occur, the
word “produced” shall be substituted; 40
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “mining lease”, the words “or
petroleum lease” shall be inserted;
(c)in sub-section (3),––
(i) for the words “crude oil, casing-head condensate or natural
gas”, the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted; 45
(ii) for the words “petroleum or natural gas, or both”, the words
“mineral oils” shall be substituted;

(d) in sub-section (4), for the words “mining leases”, the words
“petroleum leases” shall be substituted.
8.For section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new sections 9,
9A and 9B for
section 9.
5 “9. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4A or Penalties.
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), of section 6A shall be liable to a penalty of
twenty-five lakh rupees.
(2)Any rule made under any of the provisions of this Act may provide
that any contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh
10 rupees.
(3) Whoever, after having been punished with penalty as referred to in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), continues to contravene any of the
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall be liable to pay a further
penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees per day for the entire duration
15 during which the contravention continues commencing from the date of
imposition of the first penalty.
9A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Adjudication.
Gazette, make rules for providing eligibility criteria for designating an
adjudicating authority and for the manner of conducting inquiry and imposing
20 penalty under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that no officer below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India shall be designated as an adjudicating authority.
(2)The adjudicating authority may summon and enforce the attendance
of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give
25 evidence or to produce any document which in his opinion may be useful for
or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is
satisfied that the person concerned has contravened the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, he may determine such penalty in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
30 (3)No penalty shall be imposed on any person under this section or any
rules made thereunder without affording an opportunity of being heard.
9B. (1) Every appeal against the order of the adjudicating authority Appeal.
under this section shall lie with the Appellate Tribunal referred to in
section 30 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and
19 of 2006.
35 the provisions contained in sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of that Act, shall,
mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to every such appeal.
(2)The provisions contained in section 37 of the Petroleum and Natural
19 of 2006. Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006, shall mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to
every appeal against the order of the Appellate Tribunal referred to in
40 sub-section (1).”.
9. In section 10 of the principal Act, after the words, figure and letter “of Amendment of
section 6A”, the words and figure “or section 8” shall be inserted. section 10.
10.In section 11 of the principal Act, for the word “mine” wherever it occurs, Amendment of
section 11.
the word “oilfield” shall be substituted.
45 11.In section 12 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 12.
(a) for the words “mining lease”, the words “petroleum lease” shall be
substituted;
(b)for the word “mine”, the word “oilfield” shall be substituted.

Insertion of new 12. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 13A.
inserted, namely:––
Validity of “13A. All mining leases and licenses granted before commencement of
leases and the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2024, shall
licenses. continue to be valid for their respective tenure subject to the terms and 5
conditions governing the grant of such leases and licenses.”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Originally, oilfields, mines and minerals were comprehensively regulated
together through the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.
Subsequently, in 1957, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957 was enacted for the development and regulation of mines and minerals
under the control of the Union. The original Act of 1948 was also renamed as the
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (the said Act) and made
applicable to mineral oils only.
2. The said Act, which provides for a very different global energy context,
requires to be amended to meet the needs and aspirations of the country for energy
access, energy security and energy affordability. Further, there is an urgent and
pressing need to increase domestic production of oil and gas to meet the rising
demand for energy and reduce import dependence of the country. In order to unlock
valuable mineral oil resources, it is necessary to attract investment in the sector to
infuse necessary capital and technology for expediting petroleum operations in the
country by creating an investor friendly environment that promotes ease of doing
business, prospects for exploration, development and production of all types of
hydrocarbons, ensures stability, promotes adequate opportunities for risk mitigation,
addresses energy transition issues including next-generation cleaner fuels and
provides for a robust enforcement mechanism for ensuring compliance of the
provisions of the said Act.
3.Therefore, it is felt necessary to amend the said Act and for that purpose to
introduce the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 in
Parliament. The salient features of the amendments proposed in the said Bill,
inter alia, are—
(a)delinking of petroleum operations from mining operations;
(b)broadening the scope of the expression “mineral oils”;
(c)Introducing the concept of “petroleum lease”;
(d)granting lease on stable terms;
(e) strengthening petroleum operations through rules framed for
governing various functional aspects, such as, grants of leases or licences, their
extension or renewal, sharing of production and processing facilities including
infrastructure and safety at oilfields;
(f)providing for efficacious dispute resolution;
(g) decriminalising the provisions of the said Act by introducing
penalties, adjudication by an adjudicating authority and appeal as against the
order of adjudicating authority;
(h)creating an environment for facilitating energy transition by enabling
development of comprehensive energy projects for harnessing wind and solar
energy along with mineral oils at oilfields.
4.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; HARDEEP SINGH PURI.
The 31st July, 2024.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules
for the purposes of regulating various aspects of petroleum leases such as the grant,
extension and renewal thereof, including the terms subject to which they may be
merged or combined. The clause also provides for residuary powers to frame rules
relating to matters connected therewith.
2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make
rules regarding matters connected with mineral oil development including safety,
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and facilitating development of comprehensive
energy projects at oilfields. The clause also provides for residuary powers to frame
rules relating to matters connected therewith.
3.Clause 8 of the Bill provides for insertion of new sections 9A and 9B so as
to empower the Central Government to make rules for providing the eligibility
criteria for designation of an adjudicating authority and for providing the manner in
which the adjudicating authority shall conduct inquiry and impose the penalties.
4.The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure
or detail. The delegation of legislative power is, thus, of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE OILFIELDS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1948
(53 OF 1948)
* * * * *
3.In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,— Definitions.
* * * * *
(b) “mine” means any excavation for the purpose of searching for
or obtaining mineral oils and includes an oilwell;
(c)“mineral oils” include natural gas and petroleum;
(d) “mining lease” means a lease granted for the purpose of searching
for, winning, working, getting, making merchantable, carrying away or
disposing of mineral oils or for purposes connected therewith, and includes an
exploring or a prospecting license;
(e) “oilfield” means any area where any operation for the purpose of
obtaining natural gas and petroleum, crude oil, refined oil, partially refined oil
and any of the products of petroleum in a liquid or solid state, is to be or is
being carried on.
4. (1) No mining lease shall be granted after the commencement of this act No mining lease
otherwise than in accordance with the rules made under this Act. to be valid
unless it is in
(2)Any mining lease granted contrary to the provisions of sub-section (1) shall accordance with
this Act.
be void and of no effect.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Power to make
make rules for regulating the grant of mining leases or for prohibiting the grant of rules as respects
mining leases.
such leases in respect of any mineral oil or in any area.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which, the mineral oils or areas in respect of which
and the persons by whom, applications for mining leases may be made and the
fees to be paid on any such application;
(b) the authority by which, the terms on which, and the conditions
subject to which, mining leases may be granted;
(c)the maximum or minimum area and the period for which any mining
lease may be granted, and the terms on which leases in respect of contiguous
areas may be amalgamated;
(d) the fixing of the maximum and minimum rent payable by a lessee,
whether the mine is worked or not.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Power to make
make rules for the conservation and development of mineral oils. rules as respects
mineral
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing development.
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) the regulation of drilling, re-drilling, deepening, shutting down,
plugging and abandoning of oil wells in an oilfield and for the limitation or
prohibition of such operations and for the taking of remedial measures to
prevent waste of or damage to oil;

(e) the regulation of the methods of producing oil in any oilfield, and the
limitation or prohibition of such methods;
* * * * *
(g)the taking of samples from mines and new bore-holes;
* * * * *
(i)the collection of royalties, and the levy and collection of fees or taxes, in
respect of mineral oils mined, quarried, excavated or collected;
(j)the submission by the owners or lessees of mines of special or periodical
returns and reports, and the forms in which and the authorities to whom such
returns and reports shall be submitted.
Royalties in 6A. (1) The holders of a mining lease granted before the commencement of the
respect of Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1969 shall, notwithstanding 39 of 1969.
mineral oils.
anything contained in the instrument of lease or in any law in force at such
commencement, pay royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined, quarried, excavated or
collected by him from the leased area after such commencement, at the rate for the time
being specified in the Schedule in respect of that mineral oil.
(2) The holder of a mining lease granted on or after the commencement of the
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1969 shall pay royalty in 39 of 1969.
respect of any mineral oil mined, quarried, excavated or collected by him from the leased
area at the rate for the time being specified in the Schedule in respect of that mineral oil.
(3)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), no
royalty shall be payable in respect of any crude oil, casing-head condensate or natural
gas which is unavoidably lost or is returned to the reservoir or is used for drilling or other
operations relating to the production of petroleum, or natural gas, or both.
(4)The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend
the Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the rate at which royalty shall be payable in
respect of any mineral oil with effect from such date as may be specified in the
notification and different rates may be notified in respect of same mineral oil mined,
quarried, excavated or collected from the areas covered by different classes of mining
leases:
Provided that the Central Government shall not fix the rates of royalty in respect
of any mineral oil so as to exceed twenty per cent. of the sale price of the mineral oil at
the oilfields or the oil well-head, as the case may be.
* * * * *
Penalties. 9.(1) Any rule made under any of the provisions of this Act may provide that any
contravention thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
(2) Whoever, after having been convicted of any offence referred to in
sub-section (1), continues to commit such offence shall be punishable for each day after
the date of the first conviction during which he continues so to offend, with fine which
may extend to one hundred rupees.
Laying of rules 10. Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued under
and sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) of section 6A shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
notifications.
is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification
should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or notification.

11. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position of the working, actual or Power of
prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine or for any other purpose mentioned in this inspection.
Act or the rules made thereunder, any officer authorised by the Central Government in
this behalf shall have the right to—
(a)enter and inspect any mine;
(b)order the production of any document, book, register or record in the
possession or power of any person having the control of, or connected with,
any mine;
(c)examine any person having the control of, or connected with, any mine.
(2)Any officer authorised by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
45 of 1860. Code.
12.The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is in the public interest so to Relaxation of
do, authorise in any case the granting of any mining lease, or the working of any mine rules in special
cases.
on terms and conditions different from those laid down in the rules made under sections
5 and 6.
* * * * *

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.
————
(Shri Hardeep Singh Puri, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas)