AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 113 of 2024.
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:––
1.(1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
24 of 1989. 2. In section 2 of the Railways Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment of
principal Act), after clause (1A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– section 2.
‘(1B) “Board” means the Railway Board constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 2A;’.

Insertion of new 3. After Chapter I of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be
Chapter IA.
inserted, namely:––
“CHAPTER IA
RAILWAY BOARD
Railway Board. 2A. (1) There shall be constituted a body to be known as the Railway 5
Board to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions
assigned to it under this Act and the Railway Board constituted under the
Resolution of the Government of India, Public Works Department No. 256G,
dated the 18th February, 1905, with its composition as revised from time to
time, shall be deemed to be the Railway Board constituted under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, invest the Railway
Board, either absolutely or subject to any conditions, with all or any of the
powers or functions of the Central Government under this Act with respect
to all or any Railways.
(3)The qualification, experience and terms and conditions of appointment 15
of the Chairman and the other Members of the Board and the manner of
filling up the said posts shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board shall consist of such number of Members as may be
prescribed.
(5)The Board shall be provided with a Secretary and such officers and 20
other employees as may be necessary to exercise such powers and discharge
such duties under this Act and all correspondence shall be addressed to the
Secretary to the Board.
(6) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other
officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 25
(7) The Chairman and Members of the Board appointed under the
Resolution of the Government of India, Public Works Department No. 256G,
dated the 18th February, 1905, with its composition as revised from time to
time and the Secretary, officers and other employees appointed to the Board
before the commencement of the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024, shall be 30
deemed to have been appointed under this Act:
Provided that the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman,
Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board holding the
office as such immediately before the commencement of the Railways
(Amendment) Act, 2024 shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their 35
appointment.
2B. Any notice, determination, direction, requisition, appointment,
Mode of
signifying expression of opinion, approval or sanction, to be given or signified on the
communications part of the Board, for any of the purposes of, or in relation to, any powers or
from Board. functions with which it may be invested by notification under sub-section (2) 40
of section 2A, shall be sufficient and binding if in writing signed by the
Secretary to the Board, or by any other person authorised by the said Board
to act in its behalf in respect of the matters to which such authorisation may
relate; and the Board shall not in any case be bound in respect of any of the
matters aforesaid unless by some writing signed in manner aforesaid.”. 45

4.In section 200 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 200.
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
9 of 1890. “(1) The Indian Railways Act, 1890 and the Indian Railway
4 of 1905. 5 Board Act, 1905 are hereby repealed.”;
(ii)in sub-section (2),––
(a) in the opening portion, for the words, figures and brackets
9 of 1890. “the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter referred to as the repealed
Act)”, the words, figures and brackets “the Indian Railways Act, 1890
4 of 1905. 10 and the Indian Railway Board Act, 1905 (hereinafter referred to as the
repealed Acts)” shall be substituted;
(b)in clause (a), for the words “the repealed Act”, the words “the
repealed Acts” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (b), for the words “the repealed Act”, at both the
places where they occur, the words and figures “the Indian Railways
9 of 1890. Act, 1890” shall be substituted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Establishment of railway network started as a branch of the Public Works
Department before independence.
2. When the network expanded, Indian Railways Act, 1890, was enacted to
enable proper functioning of different railway entities.
3. As railways gained popularity, many Princely States and other entities
came up to establish and expand railway network.
4. Soon it was realised that railways need a structure different from the
Public Works Department because of two major reasons, namely:—
(a) First, railway is an operating organisation and therefore, it requires
flexibility and independent policy making.
(b) Second, railway has network effect and therefore, uniform
standards are needed for harmonious development.
5. Based on the aforesaid reasons, railway organisation was separated from
the Public Works Department. The Railway Board Act, 1905 was enacted.
6. A contemporary railway law, the Railways Act, 1989 was enacted in 1989
by repealing the Indian Railways Act, 1890. That time itself, the Indian
Railway Board Act, 1905 could also have been merged with the main law to
make it comprehensive.
7. The current Bill proposes to simplify the legal framework by
incorporating the proposals of the Indian Railway Board Act, 1905 in the Railways
Act, 1989. This will reduce the need to refer to two laws. Instead reference will be
required only to one law.
8. The functioning and independence of Railway Board will be enhanced
with this Bill. All the provisions in the Indian Railway Board Act, 1905 are
proposed to be incorporated in the Railways Act, 1989 through this Bill.
NEW DELHI; ASHWINI VAISHNAW.
The 7th August, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to repeal the Indian Railway Board Act, 1905 by suitably
incorporating the provisions for constitution and composition of Railway Board into
the Railways Act, 1989. The Railway Board is already in existence. The expenditure
of Railway Board will continue to be met from yearly Budgetary provision under
revenue Budget of Indian Railways as being done presently. The Bill does not
propose to create any new Board or body resulting in additional financial
implication.
2. The provisions regarding the terms and conditions of service of the
Chairman, Members of the Board, Secretary and the officers and other employees’
are already in place and no change is proposed in the proposed Bill. These provisions
may result in expenditure in the discharge of statutory functions of the Government
in regular course of business, which would be met from yearly budgetary provision
under revenue segment of Railway’s budget. However, any additional financial
implication at this stage is not quantifiable.
3.The expenditure for Railway Board proposed to be constituted as statutory
body under the Railways Act, 1989 would continue to be met from budgetary
provision under revenue segment of Railway’s budget. The Budget allocation for
the Railway Board for financial year 2024-25 is Rs. 440.01 crore under Revenue
Head.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (3) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for providing the qualification, experience and terms and conditions of
appointment of the Chairman and the other Members of the Railway Board and the
manner of filling up the said posts.
2. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules for providing the Board with such number of Members.
3. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules for providing the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and
other officers and employees of the Board.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RAILWAYS ACT,
1989 (24 OF 1989)
* * * * *
Repeal and 200.(1) The Indian Railways Act, 1890 is hereby repealed. 9 of 1890.
saving.
(2)Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter 9 of 1890.
referred to as the repealed Act)—
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done
or taken (including any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or
issued, or any appointment or declaration made or any licence, permission,
authorisation or exemption granted or any document or instrument executed
or any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine
imposed) under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act;
(b) any complaint made to the Railway Rates Tribunal under
sub-section (1) of section 41 of the repealed Act but not disposed of before
the commencement of this Act and any complaint that may be made to the
said Tribunal against any act or omission of a railway administration under
the repealed Act shall be heard and decided by the Tribunal constituted
under this Act in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of this Act.
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw, Minister of Railways)