AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 275 of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Short title and
Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2024. commencement.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.After article 82 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, Insertion of new
namely:— article 82A.
‘82A. (1) The President may by a public notification issued on the date Simultaneous
10 of the first sitting of the House of the People after a general election, bring elections to the
House of the
into force the provision of this article, and that date of the notification shall be
People and all
called the appointed date. Legislative
Assemblies.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 83 and article 172, the term of
all Legislative Assemblies constituted in any general election held after the
appointed date and before the expiry of the full term of the House of the People
shall come to an end on the expiry of the full term of the House of the People.
(3)Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution or any law for the time 5
being in force, and before the expiry of the full term of the House of the
People, the Election Commission shall conduct general elections to the House
of the People and all Legislative Assemblies simultaneously and the
provisions of Part XV shall apply to these elections mutatis mutandis with
such modifications as may, become necessary and which the Election 10
Commission may, by order, specify.
(4) The expression “simultaneous elections” shall mean general
elections held for constituting the House of the People and all the Legislative
Assemblies together.
(5)If the Election Commission is of the opinion that the elections to any 15
Legislative Assembly cannot be conducted along with the general election to
the House of the People, it may make a recommendation to the President, to
declare by an order, that the election to that Legislative Assembly may be
conducted at a later date.
(6) Where the elections to a Legislative Assembly is deferred under 20
clause (5), then, notwithstanding anything in article 172, the full term of the
Legislative Assembly shall end on same date as the end of the full term of the
House of the People constituted in the general election.
(7)The Election Commission shall at the time of notifying the election
to a Legislative Assembly under this article declare the date on which the full 25
term of the Legislative Assembly shall come to an end.’.
Amendment of 3.In article 83 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following clauses shall
article 83. be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The five-year period from the date of first meeting of the House of
the People shall be referred to as the full term of the House of the People. 30
(4) Where the House of the People is dissolved sooner than the expiry
of its full term, the period between its date of dissolution and five years from
the date of the first meeting shall be referred to as its unexpired term.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2), where the House of the
People is dissolved sooner than the expiry of its full term, the new House of 35
the People constituted pursuant to elections occasioned by such dissolution,
unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for such period as is equal to the
unexpired term of the immediately preceding House of the People and
expiration of this period shall operate as a dissolution of the House.
(6)The House of the People constituted under clause (5) shall not be a 40
continuation of the previous House of the People and all the consequences of
dissolution shall apply to the House of the People referred to in clause (4).
(7) The election for constituting the House of the People for its
unexpired term shall be referred to as a mid-term election, and the election
held after the expiry of the full term shall be referred to as the general 45
election.”.
Amendment of 4.In article 172 of the Constitution,—
article 172.
(a)after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(1A) The five-year period from the date of the first meeting of the
State Legislative Assembly shall be referred to as full term of the State
Legislative Assembly.”;
(b)after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Where the State Legislative Assembly is dissolved sooner
than the expiry of its full term, the period between its date of dissolution
and five years from the date of the first meeting shall be referred to as
its unexpired term.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), where the State
10 Legislative Assembly is dissolved sooner than the expiry of its full term,
and a new State Legislative Assembly is constituted pursuant to
elections occasioned by such dissolution, then, such new State
Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for such
period as is equal to the unexpired term of the immediately preceding
15 State Legislative Assembly and the expiration of this period shall
operate as a dissolution of the Assembly.
(5) The State Legislative Assembly constituted under clause (4)
shall not be a continuation of the previous State Legislative Assembly
and all the consequences of dissolution shall apply to the State
20 Legislative Assembly referred to in clause (3).”.
5. In article 327 of the Constitution, after the words “delimitation of Amendment of
article 327.
constituencies”, the words “, conduct of simultaneous elections” shall be inserted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The general elections to the House of the People and all State Legislative
Assemblies were held simultaneously in the years 1951-52, 1957, 1962 and 1967.
However, due to premature dissolution of some Legislative Assemblies in 1968 and
1969, the cycle of holding polls simultaneously with the House of the People got
disrupted. The Law Commission of India in its 170th report, on “Reform of the
Electoral Laws”, inter alia, suggested that holding separate elections for State
Legislative Assemblies should be an exception rather than the rule. According to
the Commission, the general rule should be to conduct elections once every five
years for the House of the People and all State Legislative Assemblies together. The
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Grievances and Law and Justice, in its 79th report had also examined the feasibility
of holding simultaneous elections to the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and State
Legislative Assemblies and recommended an alternative and practicable methods of
holding simultaneous elections is needed and expressed confidence that a solution
would be found to reduce the frequency of electoral processes.
2. There is an imperative need for holding of simultaneous elections for
various reasons and given that elections have become expensive and time
consuming. The imposition of Model Code of Conduct in several parts of the
country which are poll bound put on hold the entire development programmes, cause
disruption of normal public life, impact the functioning of services and also curtail
the involvement of manpower from their core activities for deployment for
prolonged periods for election duties.
3. The High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Ram Nath
Kovind, former President of India was constituted on 2nd September, 2023 to
examine the issue of simultaneous elections and make recommendations for holding
simultaneous elections in the country. After due deliberation and examination of all
the material available on record and the consultations held on the subject, the
Committee submitted its recommendations to the Hon’ble President on
14th March, 2024. The Government has accepted the recommendations of the High
Level Committee.
4. The High Level Committee, inter alia, has recommended that in the first
stage elections to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies should be
held simultaneously. For implementation of the recommendations of the High Level
Committee, a Bill, namely, the Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-ninth
Amendment) Bill, 2024 is proposed providing for holding of simultaneous elections
to the House of the People and all Legislative Assemblies.
5.The Bill proposes to insert a new article 82A (Simultaneous elections to the
House of the People and all Legislative Assemblies) and to amend article 83
(Duration of Houses of Parliament), article 172 (Duration of State Legislatures) and
article 327 (Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to
Legislatures).
6.The aforesaid Bill, inter alia, provides that after its enactment, a notification
is to be issued by the President on the date of the first sitting of the House of the
People after a general election, and that date of the notification shall be called the
appointed date. The tenure of the House of the People shall be five years from that
appointed date. The tenure of all Legislative Assemblies, constituted by elections to
the Legislative Assemblies after the appointed date and before the expiry of the full
term of the House of the People, shall come to an end on the expiry of the full term
of the House of the People. Thereafter, all general elections to the House of the
People and all Legislative Assemblies shall be held together simultaneously. In case
of dissolution of the House of the People or a Legislative Assembly, sooner than the

full term of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly, the term of the
House or Assembly constituted pursuant to elections shall be for the unexpired term
of the House or the Assembly.
7.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL.
The 12th December, 2024.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
327. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from Power of
time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in Parliament to
make provision
connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or either
with respect to
House of the Legislature of a State including the preparation of electoral rolls, the elections to
delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due Legislatures.
constitution of such House or Houses.
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, Minister of State (I/C) for Law & Justice and
Minister of State of Parliamentary Affairs)