AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 177 of 2024
THE COASTAL SHIPPING BILL, 2024
________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION AND LICENCE FOR COASTING TRADE
3. Prohibition on coasting trade.
4. Licence for coasting trade.
5. Suspension, revocation or modification of licence.
6. Reporting requirements.
7. Licence to be produced for port clearance.
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL COASTAL AND INLAND SHIPPING STRATEGIC PLAN AND NATIONAL
DATABASE OF COASTAL SHIPPING
8. National Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan.
9. National Database of Coastal Shipping.
CHAPTER IV
LICENCING OF CHARTERED VESSELS OTHER THAN FOR COASTING TRADE
10. Application of Chapter.
11. Requirement of licence by chartered vessels.
12. Suspension, revocation or modification of licence granted to chartered
vessels.
13. Licence granted to chartered vessel to be returned when ceases to be valid.
14. No port clearance without production of licence.
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. Punishment for participating in coasting trade in contravention of section 3.
16. Punishment for participating in coasting trade after licence ceases to be valid.
17. Punishment for taking vessel into sea in contravention of section 11.
18. Punishment for failure to furnish information or furnishing false information
after notice.
19. Punishment for violation of order of detention.
20. Punishment for illegally detaining person authorised to detain vessel.

(ii)
CLAUSES
21. Penalty for reporting false or misleading information.
22. Penalty for violation of conditions of licence.
23. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Director-General.
24. Penalty for non-compliance with order of Central Government.
25. General provision for contravention or non-compliance.
26. Compounding of certain offences.
27. Special provision regarding punishment.
28. Offences by companies.
29. Power to enforce detention of vessel.
30. Adjudicating officer for imposition of penalty, appeal and procedure
therefor.
31. Notice in respect of foreign vessel.
32. Place of trial and jurisdiction of court.
33. Service of documents.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
34. Power to delegate.
35. Power of Director-General to give directions and seek information.
36. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
37. Power to exempt.
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.
39. Power of Central Government to make rules.
40. Laying of rules and notifications before Parliament.
41. Power to remove difficulties.
42. Repeal and savings.

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 177 of 2024
THE COASTAL SHIPPING BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to regulation of coastal shipping,
promote coasting trade and encourage domestic participation therein, to
ensure that India is equipped with a coastal fleet, owned and operated by the
citizens of India for its national security and commercial needs, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Shipping Act, 2024. Short title,
application and
(2) Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply to–– commencement.

(a) every vessel, other than an Indian vessel, engaged in coasting trade,
irrespective of the place of residence or domicile of the owner;
(b) every chartered vessel referred to in Chapter IV; and
(c) coastal waters of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 5
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed
for different provisions of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
Definitions.
(a) “coasting trade” means carriage of goods or passengers by sea from
any port or place in India to any other port or place in India, or performing any 10
service within coastal waters but shall not include fishing of any kind.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “service” includes
exploration, exploitation, research, and any other commercial activity in the
coastal waters other than carriage of goods or passengers by sea;
(b) “coastal waters” means any part of the territorial waters of India, 15
along with any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India within the
meaning of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic
Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, for undertaking coasting trade: 80 of 1976.
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify any
port or place including inland waters of India as part of the coastal waters for 20
the purposes of this Act;
(c) “committee” means the committee constituted under sub-section (3) of
section 8 for preparing the National Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan;
(d) “Director-General” means the Director-General appointed under the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; 25 44 of 1958.
(e) “Indian vessel” means any vessel registered in India under the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; 44 of 1958.
(f) “licence” means the licence issued by the Director-General under
section 4 or section 11;
(g) “licensee” includes the owner or master or charterer or operator or 30
any person operating the vessel under a licence granted to such vessel by the
Director-General;
(h) “National Database of Coastal Shipping” means the database
maintained by the Director-General under section 9;
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India 35
or the Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be, and the expression
“notify” with its grammatical variation and cognate expressions, shall be
construed accordingly;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government under this Act; 40
(k) “principal officer” means the principal officer of the Mercantile
Marine Department referred to in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; 44 of 1958.
(l) “proper officer” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (34)
of section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962; 52 of 1962.
(m) “Strategic Plan” means the National Coastal and Inland Shipping 45
Strategic Plan published under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(n) “vessel” includes every description of water craft, used or capable of
being used in the marine environment, whether self-propelled or not, such as ship,
boat, sailing vessel, fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible, hydrofoils,
non-displacement crafts, amphibious crafts, wing-in-ground crafts, pleasure 50
crafts, barges, lighters, mobile offshore drilling units and mobile offshore units.

(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
44 of 1958. Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
5 PROHIBITION AND LICENCE FOR COASTING TRADE
3. (1) No vessel, other than an Indian vessel, shall engage in coasting trade, in Prohibition on
the coastal waters, except under a licence granted by the Director-General under coasting trade.
section 4:
Provided that the Director-General may, by order in writing, permit a vessel
24 of 2021. 10 registered under the Inland Vessels Act, 2021, to engage in coasting trade to such
extent and subject to such conditions, as may be specified in that order.
(2) Whoever engages any person to undertake coasting trade shall ensure that
such person does not violate the provisions of sub-section (1).
4. (1) Every application for grant of a licence for coasting trade shall be made Licence for
15 to the Director-General in such form, manner and on payment of such fee, as may coasting trade.
be prescribed.
(2) Before issuing a licence under this section, the Director-General shall take
into consideration the following factors, namely:—
(a) whether the applicant has previously held a licence that was
20 cancelled;
(b) whether the applicant has engaged in violation of any of the
provisions of this Act prior to or during the period of pendency of his
application;
(c) citizenship of the crew;
25 (d) build requirements of the vessel;
(e) availability of vessels on the route;
(f) licences granted to vessels for the same route;
(g) safety, national and maritime security concerns;
(h) equipment on board the vessel including communication equipment;
30 (i) the Strategic Plan under section 8;
(j) cost efficiency of transport;
(k) validity of the certificates of vessel and crew;
(l) validity of the certificate of insurance of the vessel; and
(m) any other requirements as the Director-General may consider
35 necessary in furtherance of the objectives of this Act.
(3) A licence granted under this section shall be in such form, for such period
and shall be subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Director-General may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
specify such other conditions as may be necessary for grant of the licence.
40 (4) The class or category of licence to be granted under this section shall be
such as may be prescribed.

S uspension, 5. (1) The Director-General may, if the circumstances of the case so require to
revocation or meet the objectives of this Act, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded
modification of
therein, suspend, revoke or modify a licence granted under section 4, if the licensee,
licence.
or any person engaged by him––
(a) violates any condition of the licence; or 5
(b) fails to comply with any requirement under any law for the time
being in force applicable to the vessel; or
(c) fails to comply with a direction issued under section 35; or
(d) fails to pay any fine or serve any sentence imposed under this Act:
Provided that the suspension, revocation or modification of licence under this 10
clause shall not absolve the licensee from his obligation for payment of any fine or
penalty, or undergoing any punishment, imposed on him under this Act.
(2) No licence granted under section 4 shall be suspended, revoked or
modified under sub-section (1), unless the licensee has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard. 15
(3) A licensee, who intends to modify the particulars of the licence granted to
him under section 4, may make an application to the Director-General in that behalf
in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) Where the licence granted under section 4 ceases to be valid due to expiry
of its period or revocation, the licensee shall–– 20
(a) return it or cause it to be returned to the Director-General; and
(b) cease to engage in coasting trade,
within such period as may be specified by the Director-General.
R eporting 6. Every vessel, including Indian vessels engaged in coasting trade, shall
requirements. report to the Director-General the following information in such form and manner 25
as may be prescribed, namely:––
(a) the port or ports which it will visit in the course of its voyage;
(b) goods or passengers carried by such vessel and the ports or places
where such goods or passengers will be dropped off;
(c) any offshore area in which it may operate or navigate for the purposes 30
of its voyage; and
(d) such other information as the Director-General may deem fit.
Licence to be 7. (1) No proper officer shall grant clearance to a vessel, other than an Indian
produced for
vessel, engaging in coasting trade to enter or depart from a port, unless the licensee
port clearance.
or agent of such vessel produces the licence granted under section 4. 35
(2) Where any vessel fails to comply with the requirements of this Act, the
Director-General or the principal officer or an officer designated by the Central
Government in this behalf may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
licensee or agent of such vessel, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded
therein, detain that vessel until an order is issued for the release of such vessel. 40
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL COASTAL AND INLAND SHIPPING STRATEGIC PLAN AND NATIONAL
DATABASE OF COASTAL SHIPPING
National Coastal 8. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of two years from the
and Inland
date of commencement of this Act, by notification, publish a National Coastal and 45
Shipping
Strategic Plan. Inland Shipping Strategic Plan for the purposes of this Act, which shall be updated
every two years by a like notification.
(2) The Strategic Plan shall include the following, namely:––

(a) assessment of the condition of coastal shipping routes in India
including routes occupied by inland waterways;
(b) identification of the operational improvements required in coastal
shipping, including those by way of integration with inland waterway routes,
5 in order to make coastal maritime transport a cost-efficient mode of
transportation for goods and passengers;
(c) long term forecasts of traffic on coastal shipping and inland
waterways network;
(d) identification of best practices for improving the performance of
10 coastal shipping including the synergy presented by inland waterway routes
and other modes of transportation;
(e) identification of new routes for coastal shipping and integration
thereof with inland waterways and existing coastal shipping routes;
(f) measures for the promotion of building, registration and participation
15 of Indian vessels in coastal shipping in India;
(g) recommendations regarding the conditions subject to which vessels
registered under the Inland Vessels Act, 2021, may engage in coasting trade
24 of 2021.
of India; and
(h) such other matters as may be prescribed.
20 (3) The Central Government shall constitute a committee consisting of the
following members for preparing the Strategic Plan, namely:—
(a) Director-General of Shipping—Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) Chairman, Inland Waterways Authority of India constituted under section 3
82 of 1985. of the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985—Member, ex officio;
25 (c) one representative of each Board of Major Port Authority constituted under
1 of 2021. sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Major Port Authority Act, 2021—Members;
(d) one representative of the National Security Council Secretariat—Member;
(e) one representative of each State Maritime Board or any other body
responsible for the administration of ports other than major ports, in a State or
30 Union territory—Members;
(f) two representatives to represent ship owners—Members;
(g) two representatives of seafarers—Members; and
(h) such other persons having expertise in the field of coastal trade,
mercantile and marine trade or maritime sector, as the Central Government
35 may deem necessary—Members.
(4) The committee shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such
procedure for the transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum at
such meetings, as may be prescribed.
(5) The committee shall prepare a draft of the Strategic Plan for consideration
40 and approval of the Central Government and the Central Government shall, after
considering the draft Strategic Plan, approve the Plan with or without modifications.
(6) The Central Government shall make available the Strategic Plan on its
website for public access.
9. (1) The Director-General shall maintain a web portal of a database to be National
45 called the National Database of Coastal Shipping in such form and manner as may Database of
Coastal
be prescribed.
Shipping.

(2) The National Database of Coastal Shipping shall contain the following
information on coasting trade in India, namely:––
(a) applications received for licence under section 4;
(b) licences granted under section 4;
(c) terms and conditions of the licences so granted; 5
(d) routes, voyages and services in the coasting trade of India;
(e) requirement of applicants for grant of licences under section 4;
(f) expired and revoked licences under section 5;
(g) information reported to the Director-General under section 6;
(h) such other information as the Director-General may deem fit. 10
(3) The Director-General shall make available the National Database of
Coastal Shipping in electronic form on a web portal for access to the public and it
shall be updated every month.
CHAPTER IV
LICENCING OF CHARTERED VESSELS OTHER THAN FOR COASTING TRADE 15
Application of 10. This Chapter shall apply to all sea going vessels, chartered by a citizen of
Chapter. India or a non-resident Indian or an overseas citizen of India, or a company or a
co-operative society or a limited liability partnership or any other entity as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, proceeding to sea
from a port or place–– 20
(a) in India, to a port or place outside India; or
(b) outside India, to a port or place in India or outside India.
Requirement of 11. (1) No vessel, other than an Indian vessel, chartered by a citizen of India
licence by
or a non-resident Indian or an overseas citizen of India or a company or a
chartered
vessels. co-operative society or a limited liability partnership or any other entity as the 25
Central Government may, by notification specify in this behalf, shall be taken to sea
from a port or place within India or outside India, except under a licence granted by
the Director-General under this section:
Provided that no vessel which is chartered by an overseas citizen of India shall
be required to obtain licence, if such vessel is chartered exclusively for operation 30
outside India.
(2) A licence granted under this section may be––
(a) a general licence; or
(b) a licence for a specified period or voyage.
(3) Every application for grant of licence under this section shall be made to 3 5
the Director-General in such form, manner and on payment of such fee, as may be
prescribed.
(4) A licence granted under this section shall be in such form, for such period
and shall be subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Director-General may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 40
specify such other conditions as may be necessary, for grant of the licence under
this section.
Suspension, 12. (1) The Director-General may, at any time, if the circumstances of the case
revocation or so require, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, suspend,
modification of
revoke or modify a licence granted under section 11: 45
licence granted to
chartered vessels.

Provided that no such licence shall be suspended, revoked or modified, unless
the licensee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) A licensee, who intends to modify the particulars of the licence granted to
him under section 11, may make an application to the Director-General in that behalf
5 in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
13. Where a licence granted under section 11 ceases to be valid due to expiry of Licence granted to
its period or revocation, the licensee shall return it or cause it to be returned to the chartered vessel to
be returned when
Director-General, within such period as may be specified by the Director-General.
ceases to be valid.
14. No proper officer shall grant port clearance to any vessel requiring a No port
10 licence under this Chapter, unless the owner, master or agent of the vessel produces clearance
without
a valid licence in respect of such vessel.
production of
licence.
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. Whoever engages in coasting trade in contravention of the provisions of Punishment for
15 section 3, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to participating in
coasting trade in
six months, or with fine which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees, or four times the
contravention of
value of all fees or commission or payments received by the owner or charterer of section 3.
the vessel for the voyage, whichever is greater, or with both, and the vessel shall
also be liable for detention under section 29.
20 16. Whoever engages in coasting trade in contravention of the provisions of Punishment for
clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 5, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a participating in
coasting trade
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh
after licence
rupees, or two times the value of all fees or commission or payments received by the ceases to be
licensee of the vessel for all voyages conducted in contravention, whichever is greater, valid.
2 5 or with both, and the vessel shall also be liable for detention under section 29.
17. Whoever takes a vessel to sea in contravention of the provisions of Punishment for
section 11, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to taking vessel
into sea in
six months, or with fine which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees, or four times the
contravention of
value of all fees or commission or payments received by the owner or charterer of section 11.
30 the vessel for the voyage, whichever is greater, or with both, and the vessel shall
also be liable for detention under section 29.
18. If any licensee or agent on whom a notice has been served under P u n i shment for
failure to furnish
sub-section (2) of section 35––
information or
furnishing false
(a) fails to furnish the information required within the time specified; or information after
notice.
35 (b) furnishes any information or makes any statement which the licensee
or agent knows to be false on any material particular,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and
the vessel shall also be liable for detention under section 29.
40 19. If any vessel in respect of which a notice or order for detention has been Punishment for
served under this Act, proceeds to sea before it is released, the licensee of the vessel violation of
order of
in respect of which the contravention has taken place shall be punishable with
detention.
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to fifteen lakh rupees, or with both, and the vessel shall also be liable for
45 detention under section 29.

P unishment for 20. Where any vessel, after detention, or order for such detention proceeds to
illegally sea with any person authorised to detain any vessel on board, before it is released,
detaining person
the licensee or agent of such vessel shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
authorised to
detain vessel. term which may extend to six months or with fine upto one lakh rupees and all
expenses of, and incidental to, such person being so taken to sea, or with both, and 5
the vessel shall also be liable for detention under section 29.
Penalty for 21. If any person who is required to report any information to the
reporting false or
Director-General under section 6 fails to do so, or otherwise intentionally reports
misleading
information.
misleading or false information, such person shall be liable for penalty which may
extend to one lakh rupees. 10
Penalty for 22. Whoever fails to comply with the conditions of licence granted under
v
co
io
n
l
d
a
i
t
t
i
i
o
o
n
n s
o f
o f
section 4 or section 11, shall be liable for penalty which may extend to ten lakh
licence. rupees, or two times the value of all fees or commission or payments received by
the licensee of the vessel for all voyages conducted in contravention, whichever
is greater, or with both, and the vessel shall also be liable for detention under 15
section 29.
Penalty for non- 23. Any licensee or agent, who fails to comply with any direction of the
compliance of
Director-General under sub-section (1) of section 35, shall be liable for penalty
direction of
Director- which may extend to five lakh rupees, or two times the value of all fees or
General. commission or payments received by such licensee or agent for all voyages 20
conducted in contravention of such direction, whichever is greater, and the vessel
shall also be liable for detention under section 29.
Penalty for non- 24. Any licensee or agent, who fails to comply with an order of the Central
compliance with Government under this Act, shall be liable for penalty of not less than fifteen lakh rupees,
order of Central
Government. and the vessel may also be liable for detention under section 29. 25
General 25. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, or fails to comply with
provision for any provision thereof, or of any rule, direction, order or notification made
contravention or
non-compliance.
thereunder, for which no punishment or penalty is specially provided in this Act,
shall be liable for penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees, and if the breach is
a continuing one, with further penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees for 30
every day after the first day during which the breach continues.
Compounding of 26. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
certain offences. Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under sections 15 to 20 of this Act, may, 46 of 2023.
before or after the institution of prosecution, be compounded by an officer
designated by the Central Government, by notification in this behalf, on payment 35
for credit to the Central Government of such sum and in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount
of the fine which may be imposed under this Act for the offences so compounded:
Provided further that in case of subsequent offence, the same shall not be 40
compounded.
(2) The officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the powers to
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central
Government.
(3) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such 45
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution,
no prosecution shall be instituted against the offender in relation to whom the offence
is so compounded.

(5) Where the compounding of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in
sub-section (1), in writing, to the notice of the court in which the prosecution is
pending and on such notice for compounding the offence being given, the person
5 against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(6) Any person who fails to comply with an order of compounding made by
the officer referred to in sub-section (1), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent to
twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for the offence, in addition to fine
provided for the said offence.
10 (7) No offence punishable under this Act shall be compounded except in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 23 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Special
46 of 2023. Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, it shall be lawful for a Judicial Magistrate of the first class provision
regarding
to pass any sentence provided under this Act on any person convicted of an offence
punishment.
15 under this Act.
28. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, Offences by
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in-charge of, and was companies.
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
20 proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if such person proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that such person exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
25 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that such offence
was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or partner, or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or partner, or other officer shall be
30 deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall also be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” includes a co-operative society, a firm or limited liability
partnership firm or other association of individuals; and
35 (b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
29. Where a vessel is authorised or ordered to be detained under this Act, any Power to enforce
commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or Indian Coast Guard, or Police, or any detention of
vessel.
port officer, pilot, harbour master or conservator of port, or the Commissioner of
Customs, or any other person authorised under this Act, may detain the vessel under
40 instructions of the principal officer.
30. (1) The principal officer shall be the adjudicating officer for the purposes A djudicating
of imposing penalty under sections 21 to 25.
officer for
imposition of
(2) Any person aggrieved by the order of the principal officer imposing the
penalty, appeal
and procedure
penalty under sub-section (1) may, within a period of thirty days from the date of
therefor.
45 receipt of such order, prefer an appeal before the Director-General in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Director-General shall dispose of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2)
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such appeal.
(4) No order shall be passed under this section unless the parties have been
50 given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

(5) Any penalty imposed under sections 21 to 25 may be compounded for the
first contravention by an officer designated by the Central Government by
notification in this behalf.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if a penalty imposed by
the principal officer or the Director-General under this Chapter is not deposited, the 5
amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
Notice in respect 31. If any vessel, other than an Indian vessel, is detained under this Act, or if
of foreign any proceeding is taken under this Act against the licensee or agent of such vessel,
vessel. notice shall forthwith be served on the consular office of the country in which such
vessel is registered, or nearest to the port where the vessel is for the time being, in 10
such form and manner as may be prescribed, and such notice shall specify the
grounds on which the vessel has been detained or the proceedings have been taken.
32. Any person committing any offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder,
Place of trial and
jurisdiction of may be tried for such offence in any place in which such person may be found, or in any
court. court which the Central Government may, by notification, direct in this behalf, or in any 15
court in which such person might be tried under any other law for time being in force in
India.
Service of 33. Where, for the purposes of this Act, any document is to be served on any
documents. person, that document may be served,—
(a) in any case by delivering a copy thereof personally to the person to 20
be served, or by leaving the same at his last place of residence, or by post or
by such electronic means as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf;
(b) on the master of a vessel where there is master, or on the person being
or appearing to be in command or charge of the vessel, by leaving the same 25
for him on board that vessel; and
(c) on the owner of the vessel where there is no master and the vessel is
in India, or if such owner is not in India, on the agent of the owner residing in
India, or, where no such agent is known or is found, by affixing at a suitable
place on the bridge of the vessel. 30
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
Power to 34. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that
delegate.
any power, authority or jurisdiction, exercisable by it under or in relation to any of
the provisions of this Act, may be exercisable also by the Director-General or such 35
other officer and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Director-General may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, by general or special order, direct that any power or authority
conferred upon or delegated to, and any duty imposed upon him by or under this
Act, may be exercised or discharged also by such officer or authority and subject to 40
such conditions as may be specified in the order.
Power of 35. (1) The Director-General may,––
Director-
(a) in the public interest; or
General to
give directions (b) in the interest of Indian shipping; or
and seek
information. (c) in the interest of national defence and maritime security; or 45
(d) for ensuring safety of life at sea and the safety of environment,
by order, direct any vessel for which licence has been granted under this Act, in
respect of the following, namely:—
(i) the ports or places, whether within or outside India, to which, and the
routes by which, the vessel shall proceed for any particular purpose; 50
(ii) the diversion of a vessel from one route to another for any particular
purpose;

(iii) the classes of passengers or cargo which may be carried in the
vessel;
(iv) the order of priority in which passengers or cargo may be taken on
or put off the vessel at any port or place, whether within or outside India;
(v) to ban any vessel from entering any port, anchorage or offshore
facility in India;
(vi) any other matter which the Director-General may deem necessary.
(2) The Director-General may, by notice, require the licensee or agent of any
vessel in respect of which—
10 (a) licence is granted under this Act; or
(b) any direction is given relating to diversion of a vessel from one route to
another for any particular purpose,
to furnish such information as may be considered necessary within such period as
may be specified in the said notice, which may include—
15 (i) the classes of passengers and cargo which the ship is about to carry,
or is capable of carrying, or has carried during any specified period; or
(ii) the rates of passenger fares and freight charges applicable to the
vessel; or
(iii) any other matter as may be prescribed.
20 36.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every person shall, in Power of Central
the discharge of his functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions Government to
issue directions.
on questions of policy as the Central Government may give to it in writing from
time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of
25 policy or not shall be final.
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any law for the time Power to
being in force, the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Director-General exempt.
with the prior permission of the Central Government, if is of opinion that it is
necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, may, by order in writing and
30 subject to such conditions and for such period as it may think fit, exempt from the
provisions of this Act,––
(a) any vessel or class of vessels engaged in coasting trade; or
(b) any class of vessels chartered by a citizen of India or non-resident
Indian or an overseas citizen of India, or a company or a co-operative society
35 or a limited liability partnership or such entities as may be specified by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 11.
38. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person P rotection of action
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. taken in good faith.
39. (1) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous Power of
4 0 publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Central
Government to
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing make rules.
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner of application for grant of licence to be made
to the Director-General and the fee to be paid for the same under
45 sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) the form, period and the conditions subject to which licence shall be
granted under sub-section (3) of section 4;
(c) the class or category of licence to be granted under sub-section (4) of
section 4;

(d) the form and manner of making application for modification of
particulars of a licence to be made to the Director-General under sub-section (3)
of section 5;
(e) the form and manner of reporting the requirements to the Director-General
under section 6; 5
(f) such other matters to be included in the Strategic Plan under
clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 8;
(g) the time, place and the procedure to be observed by the committee
for the transaction of business at its meetings and the quorum at such meetings
under sub-section (4) of section 8; 10
(h) the form and manner of maintaining the National Database of Coastal
Shipping by the Director-General under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(i) the form and manner of application for grant of licence to be made to the
Director-General and the fee to be paid under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(j) the form, period and the conditions subject to which licence shall be 15
granted under sub-section (4) of section 11;
(k) the form and manner of making application for modification of
particulars of a licence under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(l) the sum to be paid for credit to the Central Government for compounding an
offence and the manner of making the payment under sub-section (1) of section 26; 20
(m) the form and manner of making an application for the compounding
of an offence under sub-section (3) of section 26;
(n) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the Director-General
under sub-section (2) of section 30;
(o) the form and manner of issuance of notice under section 31; 25
(p) any other matters in respect of which the Director-General may, by
notice, require the owner, master or agent of any vessel to furnish information
under clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 35;
(q) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed for
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 30
Laying of rules 40. Every rule made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid,
and notifications
as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while
before
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
Parliament.
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 35
agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree
that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification. 40
Power to remove 41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
difficulties. Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 45
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.

44 of 1958. 42. (1) Part XIV of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (herein referred to as R epeal and
Part XIV of the said Act), except section 411A thereof, is hereby repealed. savings.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,––
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or exemption
5 made, issued or granted under Part XIV of the said Act shall, until revoked,
have effect as if it had been made, issued or granted under the provisions of
this Act;
(b) any licence granted or issued under Part XIV of the said Act shall,
until it is revoked or expires, have effect as if it had been issued or granted
10 under the provisions of this Act;
(c) any office established or created, officer or person appointed and any
body elected or constituted under Part XIV of the said Act shall continue and
shall be deemed to have been established, created, appointed, elected, or
constituted, as the case may be, under this Act;
15 (d) any document referring to Part XIV of the said Act shall be construed
as referring to this Act;
(e) any fine levied under Part XIV of the said Act may be recovered as
if it had been levied under this Act;
(f) any offence committed under Part XIV of the said Act may be
20 prosecuted and punished as if it had been committed under this Act;
(g) any proceeding pending before any court under Part XIV of the said
Act may be tried or disposed of under the corresponding provisions of
this Act;
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the
25 provisions of Part XIV of the said Act, shall continue to be proceeded with as
if such inspection, investigation or inquiry is ordered to be done under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of
10 of 1897. section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect of
30 repeal.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Coastal shipping in India holds great potential owing to vast coastline of around
7500 kilometers and proximity to important global shipping routes. It has been
recognised that maritime transportation, particularly coastal shipping is cheaper
compared to other modes of transportation. There is a need to improve transport
connectivity and supporting infrastructure in the coastal maritime transport sector.
The cost of transportation and logistics directly impacts the production cost and there
has been a concerted policy effort to improve efficiencies in this regard.
2. The regulation of the coastal maritime sector in India lacks uniformity.
Non-mechanised vessels engaged in coastwise trade are governed by the Coasting
Vessels Act, 1838 which only provides for registration of such vessels. The measures
pertaining to regulation, safety, security and pollution prevention also need to be
addressed. The mechanised vessels on the other hand fall under the purview of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
3. The present regulatory framework under Part XIV of the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958, requires Indian ship as well as ships chartered by Indian citizens and
foreign vessels to obtain licence before taking ship to sea, including for coasting
trade. However, the licencing requirement for all vessels including Indian vessels
and exclusion of foreign flag non-propelled vessels from the coasting trade has
proven to be a hindrance to competition and efficiency of the sector. It is felt
necessary to bring foreign flag non-propelled mobile offshore drilling units,
accommodation barges, etc., also within the purview of the regulatory requirements.
4. In view of the challenges arising in the regulation of coasting trade, it is
considered necessary to strengthen the regulation of vessels engaged in coasting
trade by adopting the best global practices, to meet the present and future
requirements of the maritime coastal shipping sector.
5. The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2024, inter alia, seeks to provide for the
following, namely:—
(i) to repeal Part XIV of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 relating to
control of Indian ships and ships engaged in coasting trade (except
section 411A thereof);
(ii) to include the term “service” in the definition of “coasting trade” so
as to bring offshore vessels which generally provide services without engaging
in transportation of goods and passengers, within the ambit of the Bill;
(iii) prohibition of coasting trade in the coastal water without licence by
vessels other than Indian vessels and permitting Inland vessels to engage in
coastal trading subject to certain conditions;
(iv) empowering the Director-General to issue licence after taking into
consideration certain factors including citizenship of the crew and building
requirements of the vessel so as to create more jobs for Indian seafarers and to
promote ship building in India;
(v) requirement of licence by vessels chartered by Indian entities for
purposes other than coasting trade;
(vi) creation of a National Database of Coastal Shipping so as to ensure
transparency of procedure and aid in information sharing;
(vii) preparation of a National Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan
for development, growth and promotion of coastal shipping;

(viii) provision for compounding of certain offences and imposition of
penalty by the principal officer; and
(ix) provision for empowering the Director-General to call for
information in respect of certain matters.
6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL.
The 24th November, 2024.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title, application, and
commencement of the Bill. It specifies that the Bill applies to, (a) every vessel, other
than an Indian vessel, engaged in coasting trade, (b) chartered vessels as specified
under the Bill and (c) the coastal waters of India.
Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill,
including, “coasting trade”, “coastal waters”, “National Database of Coastal
Shipping”, “vessel”, etc.
Clause 3.—This clause prohibits the engagement of vessels, other than Indian
vessels, in coasting trade in the coastal waters, unless the licence for the same has
been granted by the Director-General of Shipping.
Clause 4.—This clause provides that the Director-General may grant licence
to a vessel, for engaging in coasting trade subject to conditions prescribed by rules
made by the Central Government. It further provides for prescription of class or
categories of licence to be granted.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for the powers of the Director-General to
suspend, revoke or modify a licence granted under the Bill. It further provides for
modification of a licence, and the return of licences that have ceased to be valid.
Clause 6.—This clause provides for the reporting requirements in relation to
every vessel engaged in coasting trade.
Clause 7.—This clause provides that no proper officer of customs shall grant
clearance to a vessel, other than an Indian vessel, engaged in coasting trade to enter
or depart from a port, unless a licence is produced by the licensee or agent of such
a vessel. It further provides for the detention of a vessel which fails to comply with
the requirements of the Bill.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for the preparation and publication of a
National Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan. It enumerates the matters to
be provided for in such Plan and specifies the composition of the committee for
preparing the Plan.
Clause 9.—This clause requires the Director-General to maintain a web portal
of a database to be called the National Database of Coastal Shipping. It also
enumerates the information to be contained in such a database and provides that the
web portal of the said database is to be made available for public access which shall
be updated every month.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the application of Chapter IV of the Bill
to sea going vessels chartered by a citizen of India, or a non-resident Indian or an
overseas citizen of India, or a company or a co-operative society or a limited liability
partnership or any other entity that may be specified by the Central Government.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the requirement of licensing for
chartered vessels other than Indian vessels. It further specifies that a vessel chartered
by an overseas citizen of India shall not require a licence under this clause if it is
chartered exclusively for operation outside India.
Clause 12.—This clause empowers the Director-General, if required, to
suspend, revoke or modify a licence granted under clause 11. It further provides that
no licence can be suspended, revoked or modified unless a licensee has been given
reasonable opportunity to be heard. It also lays down the procedure for modification
of license to be prescribed by rules.

Clause 13.—This clause requires the licensee to upon such licence ceasing to
be valid due to expiration or revocation, return the licence to the Director-General.
Clause 14.—This clause prohibits any proper officer of customs to grant a port
clearance to a vessel without the production of a licence required under Chapter IV.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for punishment for anyone who participates
in coasting trade in contravention of provisions of clause 3.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for punishment for anyone who participates
in coasting trade after the license ceases to be valid.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for punishment for anyone who takes a
vessel to sea in contravention of the requirement of licensing for chartered vessels
under clause 11.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for punishment for a licensee or agent on
whom a notice has been served and who fails to furnish the information required
within the time specified or furnishes false information.
Clause 19.—This clause provides for punishment for the licensee of a vessel
on whom any notice or order for detention has been served if such licensee proceeds
to sea before it is released by an authority.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for punishment for the licensee or an agent
for illegally detaining a person authorised to detain the vessel and for proceeding to
sea before the vessel is released by the authorised officer.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for penalty for reporting misleading or false
information to the Director-General under clause 6.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for penalty for failure to comply with the
conditions of licence granted under the Bill.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for penalty for a licensee or agent of a
vessel, who fails to comply with the directions given by the Director-General.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for penalty for non-compliance with the
order of the Central Government by a licensee or agent of a vessel.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of any
provision of the Bill or failure to comply with any rule, direction, order or
notification for which no penalty is specially provided under the Bill.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for compounding of certain offences under
the Bill by an officer designated by the Central Government. It further specifies the
consequence of non-compliance with an order of the said officer. It also provides
that no compounding shall be permissible for a subsequent offence.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Judicial Magistrate of the first class to
pass a sentence specified under the Bill on any person convicted for an offence under
the Bill.
Clause 28.—This clause deems a person in-charge of and responsible for a
company to be guilty of and punished for an offence committed by such company
subject to the proviso of the clause. It further deems the director, manager, secretary
or partner or other officer of the company to be guilty and punished, if such offence
was committed with the consent of or due to any neglect of such person.
Clause 29.—This clause empowers any commissioned officer of the Indian
Navy or Indian Coast Guard or Police, or any Port Officer, Pilot, Harbour Master or
Conservator of port, or the Commissioner of Customs, or any other person
authorised under the Bill, to detain a vessel authorised or ordered to be detained
under instructions of the principal officer.

Clause 30.—This clause specifies that the principal officer shall be the
adjudicating authority for imposition of penalties under the Bill. The clause also
provides for a person aggrieved by the order for imposition of penalty to prefer an
appeal with the Director-General. It further provides for compounding of certain
offences for which penalty is specified under the Bill and specifies that penalty not
deposited shall be recovered through an arrear of land revenue.
Clause 31.—This clause provides for serving of notice on the consular office
of the country in which a vessel is registered, if such vessel is detained under the
Bill or if any proceeding is taken against the licensee or agent of such vessel.
Clause 32.—This clause specifies that any person committing any offence
under the Bill may be tried at a place in which he may be found, or in any court
which the Central Government may, by notification, direct in this behalf, or in any
court in which the person might be tried under any other law for time being in force.
Clause 33.—This clause specifies the manner of service of documents on the
concerned person or on the master of the vessel or on the person in command of the
vessel or on the owner of the vessel or on the agent of the owner.
Clause 34.—This clause empowers the Central Government to delegate its
power, authority, or jurisdiction, under the Bill to the Director-General or any other
officer subject to conditions specified in the order issued in that behalf. The clause
also empowers the Director-General with previous approval of the Central
Government to delegate his powers to any other officer or authority subject to
conditions specified in the order.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for the power of the Director-General to
give directions for matters specified under the clause to vessels granted licence
under the Bill, if considered necessary in public interest or any other interest
specified in the clause. It further empowers the Director-General to seek information
which may include matters specified under the clause, from the licensee or agent of
vessel granted licence under the Bill.
Clause 36.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue
directions with respect to the functions and duties of any person under the Bill and
it also specifies that the decision of the Central Government on a question of policy
or otherwise shall be final.
Clause 37.—This clause empowers the Central Government or the Director-
General to exempt any vessel or class of vessels engaged in coasting trade or any class
of vessels chartered by a citizen of India or a non-resident Indian or an overseas citizen
of India or a company or cooperative society or a limited liability partnership from the
provisions of the Bill for a specific period and subject to conditions as may be deemed
fit, if such exemption is considered necessary in the public interest.
Clause 38.—This clause provides for protection of persons from prosecution
or legal proceedings for actions done in good faith under the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 39.—This clause enumerates the provisions of the Bill for which the
Central Government may make rules.
Clause 40.—This clause specifies that every rule made and notification issued
under the Bill shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of the Bill, the Central Government may make provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill, which appear to it to be necessary, for
removing such difficulty within a period of three years from the date of
commencement of the Bill.
Clause 42.—This clause provides for the repeal of Part XIV of the Merchant
Shipping Act, 1958, except for section 411A thereof, and provides for saving certain
actions taken under the provisions of the enactment.

18 18

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or
non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters
include—
(i) the form and manner of application for the grant of licence and the
fee to be paid for the same under sub-clause (1), the form, period and the
conditions of licence granted under sub-clause (3), and the class or
category of licence to be granted under sub-clause (4) of clause 4; (ii) the
form and manner of making application for modification of particulars of
a licence under sub-clause (3) of clause 5; (iii) the form and manner of
reporting the requirements to the Director-General under clause 6;
(iv) other matters to be included in the National Coastal and Inland
Shipping Strategic Plan under sub-clause (2)(h) of clause 8; (v) the time,
place and the procedure to be observed by the committee for the transaction
of business at its meetings and the quorum at such meetings under sub-clause (4)
of clause 8; (vi) the form and manner of the National Database of Coastal
Shipping to be maintained by the Director-General under sub-clause (1) of
clause 9; (vii) the form and manner of application for the grant of licence
and the fee to be paid for the same under sub-clause (3) of clause 11;
(viii) the form, period and the conditions subject to which licence shall be
granted under sub-clause (4) of clause 11; (ix) the form and manner of
making application for modification of particulars of a licence under
sub-clause (2) of clause 12; (x) the sum to be paid for credit to the Central
Government for compounding an offence and the manner of making the
payment under sub-clause (1) of clause 26; (xi) the form and manner of
making an application for the compounding of an offence under sub-clause (3)
of clause 26; (xii) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the
Director-General under sub-clause (2) of clause 30; (xiii) the form and
manner of issuance of notice under clause 31; (xiv) any other matters in
respect of which the Director-General may, require the owner, master or
agent of any vessel to furnish information under sub-clause (2)(iii) of
clause 35; and (xv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
2. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules may be made
are matters of procedure and administrative details, and as such, it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to regulation of coastal shipping,
promote coasting trade and encourage domestic participation therein, to
ensure that India is equipped with a coastal fleet, owned and operated by the
citizens of India for its national security and commercial needs, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sarbananda Sonowal, Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways)