AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 15 of 2024
THE PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS (PREVENTION OF UNFAIR
MEANS) BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to prevent unfair means in the public examinations and to provide for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1.(1) This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Short title and
Means) Act, 2024. commencement.
(2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “candidate” means a person who has been granted permission by the
public examination authority to appear in public examination and includes a
person authorised to act as a scribe on his behalf in the public examination;
(b) “communication device” shall have the same meaning assigned to 5
it in clause (ha) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000; 21 of 2000.
(c) “competent authority” shall mean the Ministry or a Department of
the Central Government administratively concerned with the public
examination authority; 10
(d) “computer network”, “computer resource” and “computer system”
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (j), (k) and
(l) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000; 21 of 2000.
(e) “conduct of public examination” shall include all the procedures,
processes and activities, as may be prescribed, for being adopted for the 15
conduct of public examination;
(f) “institution” means any agency, organisation, body, association of
persons, business entity, company, partnership or single proprietorship firm,
by whatever name it may be called, which is other than the public
examination authority and the service provider engaged by such authority. 20
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, it is clarified that
“company” includes a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013; or a limited liability partnership firm as defined in 18 of 2013.
clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008; 25 7 of 2009.
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(h) “organised crime” means an unlawful activity committed by a
person or a group of persons indulging in unfair means in collusion and
conspiracy to pursue or promote a shared interest for wrongful gain in 30
respect of a public examination;
(i) “person associated with a service provider” means a person who
performs services for or on behalf of such service provider irrespective of
whether such person is an employee or an agent or a subsidiary of such
service provider, as the case may be; 35
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) “public examination” means any examination conducted by the
public examination authority, as specified in the Schedule, or conducted by
such other authority as may be notified by the Central Government;
(l) “public examination authority” means an authority as specified by 40
the Central Government by a notification, from time to time for conducting
the public examinations;
(m) “public examination centre” means such premises, which is
selected by the service provider or otherwise selected by the public
examination authority, to be used for conduct of public examination and 45
which, amongst others, may include any school, computer centre,
institution, any building or part thereof and the same shall include the entire
periphery and land appurtenant thereto which may be used for security and
other related reasons for conduct of the public examinations; and

(n) “service provider” means any agency, organisation, body,
association of persons, business entity, company, partnership or single
proprietorship firm, including its associates, sub-contractors and provider of
support of any computer resource or any material, by whatever name it may
5 be called, which is engaged by the public examination authority for conduct
of public examination.
(2) Words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined under
any other law for the time being in force, shall have the same meanings as
assigned to them in those laws.
CHAPTER II
UNFAIR MEANS AND OFFENCES
3. The unfair means relating to the conduct of a public examination shall Unfair means.
include any act or omission done or caused to be done by any person or group of
persons or institutions, and include but not be restricted to, any of the following
15 acts for monetary or wrongful gain—
(i) leakage of question paper or answer key or part thereof;
(ii) participating in collusion with others to effect leakage of question
paper or answer key;
(iii) accessing or taking possession of question paper or an Optical
20 Mark Recognition response sheet without authority;
(iv) providing solution to one or more questions by any unauthorised
person during a public examination;
(v) directly or indirectly assisting the candidate in any manner
unauthorisedly in the public examination;
25 (vi) tampering with answer sheets including Optical Mark
Recognition response sheets;
(vii) altering the assessment except to correct a bona fide error
without any authority;
(viii) willful violation of norms or standards set up by the Central
30 Government for conduct of a public examination on its own or through its
agency;
(ix) tampering with any document necessary for short-listing of
candidates or finalising the merit or rank of a candidate in a public
examination;
35 (x) deliberate violation of security measures to facilitate unfair means
in conduct of a public examination;
(xi) tampering with the computer network or a computer resource or a
computer system;
(xii) manipulation in seating arrangements, allocation of dates and
40 shifts for the candidates to facilitate adopting unfair means in examinations;
(xiii) threatening the life, liberty or wrongfully restraining persons
associated with the public examination authority or the service provider or
any authorised agency of the Government; or obstructing the conduct of a
public examination;
45 (xiv) creation of fake website to cheat or for monetary gain; and
(xv) conduct of fake examination, issuance of fake admit cards or offer
letters to cheat or for monetary gain.

Conspiracy for 4. No person or group of persons or institutions shall collude or conspire to
unfair means.
facilitate indulgence in any such unfair means.
Disruption to 5. (1) No person, who is not entrusted or engaged with the work pertaining
conduct public to the public examination or conduct of public examination or who is not a
examination.
candidate, shall enter the premises of the examination centre, with intent to disrupt 5
the conduct of the public examination.
(2) No person authorised, engaged or entrusted with the duties to conduct
public examination shall, before the time fixed for opening and distribution of
question papers––
(a) open, leak or possess or access or solve or seek assistance to solve 10
such question paper or any portion or a copy thereof in unauthorised manner for
monetary or wrongful gain;
(b) give any confidential information or promise to give such confidential
information to any person, where such confidential information is related to or
in reference to such question paper for monetary or wrongful gain. 15
(3) No person, who is entrusted or engaged with any work pertaining to
public examination shall, except where he is authorised in furtherance of his
duties so to do, reveal or cause to be revealed or make known to any other person
any information or part thereof which has come to his knowledge for any undue
advantage or wrongful gain.
6. If any person or group of persons or institution commits any unfair means
Other offences.
or offence under sections 3, 4 and section 5, the service provider shall forthwith
report the offence to the concerned police authorities and also inform the public
examination authority:
Provided that if the service provider resorts to unfair means and commits 25
the offence or is involved in facilitating an offence, the public examination
authority shall report the same to the concerned police authorities.
No premises 7. It shall be an offence for the service provider or any person associated
other than with the service provider to cause any premises, other than the examination centre,
examination authorised by the public examination authority, to be alternatively used for the 30 ]
centre shall be
used for public purpose of holding public examination, without the written approval of the public
examination. examination authority:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be an offence where
any change in the examination centre without prior consent of the public
examination authority is due to any force majeure. 35
Offences in 8. (1) Any person, including the person associated with a service provider,
respect of shall be deemed to have committed an offence if he individually or in collusion
service with any other person or group of persons or institutions assists any person or
providers and
other persons.
group of persons or institutions in any manner unauthorisedly in the conduct of
public examination.
(2) Service provider or any person associated with it shall be deemed to have
committed an offence if he fails to report incidence of any unfair means or
commission of any offence.
(3) Where an offence committed by a service provider is, prima facie,
established during investigation to have been committed with the consent or 45
connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of such service
provider, such person shall also be liable to be proceeded against:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was
committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to 50
prevent the commission of such offence.

CHAPTER III
PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES
9. All offences under this Act, shall be cognizable, non-bailable and C o gnizable
non-compoundable. offences.
5 10. (1) Any person or persons resorting to unfair means and offences under Punishment for
this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than three years offences under
this Act.
but which may extend to five years and with fine up to ten lakh rupees. In case
of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall be
45 of 2023. imposed, as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:
45 of 2023. 10 Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force,
45 of 1860. the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said
Act.
(2) The service provider shall also be liable to be punished with imposition
of a fine up to one crore rupees and proportionate cost of examination shall also
15 be recovered from such service provider and he shall also be barred from being
assigned with any responsibility for the conduct of any public examination for a
period of four years.
(3) Where it is established during the investigation that offence under this
Act has been committed with the consent or connivance of any Director, Senior
20 Management or the persons in-charge of the service provider firm, he shall be liable
for imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to ten
years and with fine of one crore rupees. In case of default of payment of fine, an
additional punishment of imprisonment shall be imposed as per the provisions of
45 of 2023. the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:
Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force,
45 of 2023. 25
45 of 1860. the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said
Act.
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment under the Act, if he proves, that the offence was committed without
30 his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
11. (1) If a person or a group of persons including the examination authority Organised
or service provider or any other institution commits an organised crime, he shall crimes.
be punished with imprisonment for a term not less than five years but which may
35 extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than one crore rupees. In
case of default of payment of fine, an additional punishment of imprisonment shall
45 of 2023. be imposed as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:
45 of 2023. Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, the
45 of 1860. provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said Act.
(2) If an institution is involved in committing an organised crime, its property
shall be subjected to attachment and forfeiture and proportionate cost of
examination shall also be recovered from it.
CHAPTER IV
INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
45 12. (1) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or Officers
Assistant Commissioner of Police shall investigate any offence under this Act. empowered to
investigate.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall have the powers to refer the investigation to any Central
Investigating Agency.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
Members, 13. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the public
o
em
ffi
p
c
l
e
o
r
y
s
e
a
e
n
s
d
o f
examination authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the 5
public
meaning of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 45 of 2023.
examination
authority to be
public Provided that until the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is brought into force, 45 of 2023.
servants. the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, shall be applicable in place of the said 45 of 1860.
Act.
Protection of 14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings under this Act, shall lie 10
action taken in against any public servant, in respect of anything which is done in good faith or
good faith by
intended to be done in the discharge of his official functions or in exercise of his
any public
powers:
servant.
Provided that the public servants in the service of any public examination
authority shall be subject to administrative action in terms of service rules of such 15
public examination authority:
Provided further that nothing shall prevent proceeding against such public
servants where, prima facie case exists for establishing commission of an offence
under this Act.
Provisions of 15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation 20
this Act to be
of, any other law for the time being in force:
in addition to
other laws. Provided that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law in force.
Power to make 16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 25
rules. make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) to lay down procedures, processes and activities for being adopted
for conduct of the public examination; 30
(b) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.
Laying of 17. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
rules. made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the session 35
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall,
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 40
Power to 18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
remove
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
difficulties.
such provisions within three years, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
as appear to it to be necessary for removal of difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 45
it is made, before each House of Parliament.

CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENT TO THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1944
19. In the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance, 1944, in the Schedule, Amendment of
after serial number 5 and entries relating thereto, the following serial number and Ordinance 38 of
1944.
5 entries shall be inserted, namely:––
"6. An offence punishable under the Public Examinations (Prevention
of Unfair Means) Act, 2024.".

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (k)]
ANY EXAMINATION CONDUCTED BY—
1. Union Public Service Commission.
2. Staff Selection Commission. 5
3. Railway Recruitment Boards.
4. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection.
5. Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and their attached and
subordinate offices for recruitment of staff.
6. National Testing Agency. 10
7. Such other authority as may be notified by the Central Government.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Government has introduced several reforms to enhance transparency in
examinations for recruitment as well as admission to higher education institutions.
These, inter alia, include introducing self-attestation; shortening examination cycle
(from 18-22 months to 6-10 months); doing away with interviews for recruitment
to Group ‘C’ and ‘D’; introduction of computer based tests and issuance of
appointment letters through digital means under “Rojgar Mela”.
2. Malpractices in public examinations lead to delays and cancellation of
examinations adversely impacting the prospects of millions of youth. At present,
there is no specific substantive law to deal with unfair means adopted or offences
committed by various entities involved in the conduct of public examinations by
the Central Government and its agencies. Therefore, it is imperative that elements
that exploit vulnerabilities of examination system are identified and effectively
dealt with by a comprehensive Central legislation.
3. The objective of the Bill is to bring greater transparency, fairness and
credibility to the public examination systems and to reassure the youth that their
sincere and genuine efforts will be fairly rewarded and their future is safe. The Bill
is aimed at effectively and legally deterring persons, organised groups or
institutions that indulge in various unfair means and adversely impact the public
examination systems for monetary or wrongful gains. Candidate as defined in the
Bill shall not be liable for action within the purview of the Bill and shall continue
to be covered under the extant administrative provisions of the concerned public
examination authority.
4. The Bill shall serve as a model draft for States to adopt at their discretion.
This would aid States in preventing the criminal elements from disrupting conduct
of their State level public examinations.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; DR. JITENDRA SINGH.
The 29th January, 2024.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definitions used in the Bill. Item (e) of
sub-clause (1) of clause 2 provides for the definition of the expression “conduct of
public examination” which empowers the Central Government to prescribe the
procedures, processes and activities, for being adopted for the conduct of public
examination.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself.
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
________
A
BILL
to prevent unfair means in the public examinations and to provide for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
________
(Dr. Jitendra Singh, Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions)