AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 98 of 2024
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) S hort title and
commencement.
Act, 2024.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to 53 of 2005.
section 2. as the principal Act),––
(i) in clause (d), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that the expression “man made causes” does not include any law and 5
order related matter or situation, or any situation arising from a law and
order related matter or situation;’;
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(da) “disaster database” means a database which includes disaster
assessment, fund allocation detail, expenditure, preparedness and 10
mitigation plan, risk register according to type and severity of risk and
such other relevant matters, in accordance with such policy, as may be
determined by the Central Government;’;
(iii) in clause (e),––
(a) in sub-clause (viii), for the words “rehabilitation and 15
reconstruction”, the words “rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction”
shall be substituted;
(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the
expression “disaster management” is inclusive of “disaster risk 20
reduction”, that is, the practice of reducing disaster risk through
systematic effort to analyse and manage the causal facts of disaster
through––
(i) reduced exposure to hazard;
(ii) reduced vulnerability of people, property, infrastructure, 25
economic activity, environmental and natural resource; and
(iii) improved preparedness, resilience and capacity to
manage and respond to adverse event;’;
(iv) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ea) “disaster risk” means the potential loss of life, injury, 30
destroyed or damaged property, infrastructure and assets, economic and
social disruption and environmental degradation, which could occur to
a system, society or a community in a specific period of time, determined
probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and
capacity. 3 5
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Act, the expression
“infrastructure” refers to physical structures, facilities, networks,
systems and assets, which provide services that are essential to the
social, ecological and economic functioning of a community or
society;’; 40
(v) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ga) “evacuation” means moving people or assets temporarily to
safer places before, during or after the occurrence of a hazardous event;
(gb) “exposure” means the situation of people, buildings,
infrastructure, production capacities and other tangible human assets, 45
the environment and natural resources located in hazard-prone areas.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression
“hazard-prone areas” means those locations where different hazards are
known to have occurred or likely to occur;

(gc) “hazard” means a process or phenomenon relating to a disaster
that may cause—
(a) loss of life;
(b) injury or other health impacts;
5 (c) damage to property, buildings and infrastructure;
(d) social and economic disruption; or
(e) environmental degradation;
(gd) “High Level Committee” means the Committee constituted
under section 8B;’;
1 0 (vi) in clause (h), after the words “Zila Parishad”, the words “or
Autonomous District Council” shall be inserted;
(vii) in clause (i), after the word “situation”, the words “including the
provisioning of disaster-resilient infrastructure” shall be inserted;
(viii) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
15 ‘(ja) “National Crisis Management Committee” means the
Committee constituted under section 8A;’;
(ix) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(la) “National Policy” means a statement of guiding principles,
and broad course of actions adopted by the Government at the national
20 and state level in pursuit of,––
(a) national objectives of reducing disaster risk and loss;
(b) improving preparedness; and
(c) ensuring resilient recovery from disaster;’;
(x) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
25 ‘(m) “preparedness” means the knowledge and capacity of
Government, response and recovery organisation, community and
individual to anticipate, respond to and recover from threatening disaster
situation or disaster;’;
(xi) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
30 ‘(na) “prevention” means activity and measure to avoid potential
adverse impact of disaster;’;
(xii) for clause (o), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(o) “reconstruction” means rebuilding and restoration of
infrastructure, service, building and facility required for the functioning
3 5 of a community affected by a disaster;
(oa) “recovery” means the restoration or improvement of
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets, system
and activity, of a disaster-affected community;
(ob) “rehabilitation” means the restoration of basic service, facility
40 and capacity for the functioning of a disaster-affected community;
(oc) “resilience” means the ability of a system, community or
society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, respond to and recover from
the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner and the
expression “resilient” shall be construed accordingly;’;

(xiii) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(pa) “response” means the action taken directly before, during or
after a disaster in order to save lives, reduce injury and health impact,
ensure public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people
affected;’; 5
(xiv) after clause (t), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(u) “Urban Authority” means the Urban Disaster Management
Authority constituted under sub-section (1) of section 41A;
(v) “Urban Plan” means the plan for disaster management,
prepared by the Urban Authority under sub-section (4) of section 41A; 10
(w) “vulnerability” means the conditions determined by physical,
social, economic and environmental factor or process which increase the
susceptibility of an individual, a community, asset, infrastructure or
system to the impact of hazard.’.
Amendment of 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 1 5
section 3. sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(3A) The day-to-day functions of the National Authority shall be
performed by the Vice-Chairperson and in the absence of the Vice-Chairperson,
by a member designated by the Chairperson or, as the case may be, the
Vice-Chairperson, of the National Authority.”. 20
Substitution of 4. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
new section for namely:––
section 5.
“5. (1) The National Authority may, with the previous approval of the
Appointment of
officers and Central Government, specify the number, nature and category of officers and
other employees other employees, as is necessary to carry out its functions. 25
of National
Authority. (2) The National Authority may also appoint experts and consultants as
necessary to perform its functions.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of officers, other employees, experts and consultants of
the National Authority, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.”. 30
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),––
Amendment of
section 6. (i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(b) co-ordinate the preparation and approval of the National
Plan;”;
(ii) in clause (i), after the words “take such other measures”, the words 35
“which includes providing technical guidance to State Governments and State
Authorities” shall be inserted;
(iii) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(k) co-ordinate and monitor the implementation of the National
Policy; 40
(l) lay down guidelines for preparing disaster management plan by
different Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and the
State Authorities;
(m) provide necessary technical guidance to the State Governments
and the State Authorities for preparing their disaster management plans in 45
accordance with the guidelines laid down by it;

(n) provide necessary advice and technical guidance to different
Ministries or Departments and agencies of the Government of India, and
the State Governments regarding mitigation, preparedness, and recovery
and reconstruction measures;
5 (o) take stock of the entire range of disaster risks in the country
periodically, including emerging disaster risks, and issue updated
guidance for their mitigation.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified
that the expression “emerging disaster risks” refer to risks of those
disasters that may not have taken place, but may occur in future due to
extreme climate events and other factors as may be determined by the
National Authority;
(p) plan and co-ordinate specialised training programmes for
disaster management for different levels of officers, employees and
15 voluntary rescue workers;
(q) provide necessary technical guidance or give advice to the State
Authorities, District Authorities and Urban Authorities for carrying out
their functions under this Act;
(r) promote general education and awareness in relation to disaster
20 management;
(s) monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the
National Authority for integrating disaster prevention and mitigation
measures in the development plans and projects of Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India;
25 (t) undertake disaster preparedness assessment of each State
periodically, in line with the National Plan and the guidelines laid down
by it;
(u) undertake in the aftermath of severe disaster in any State, post
disaster audit of preparedness and response activities of the State;
3 0 (v) create a national disaster database in accordance with such
policy as may be determined by the Central Government;
(w) recommend guidelines for the minimum standards of relief to
be provided to persons affected by disaster, which may include,—
(i) the minimum requirements to be provided in the relief
3 5 camps in relation to shelter, food, drinking water, medical cover
and sanitation;
(ii) the special provision to be made for widows and orphans;
(iii) ex gratia assistance on account of loss of life as also
assistance on account of damage to houses and for restoration of
40 means of livelihood; and
(iv) such other reliefs as the National Authority may deem
appropriate.’.
6. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of new
namely:–– sections 8A and
8B.
4 5 “8A. (1) The National Crisis Management Committee constituted by the National Crisis
Government of India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management Management
Committee.
(Amendment) Act, 2024, shall be the National Crisis Management Committee
for the purposes of this Act and act as the nodal body to deal with the major
disasters which have serious or national ramifications.

(2) The National Crisis Management Committee referred to in
sub-section (1) shall consist of the Cabinet Secretary as Chairperson and such
other members as may be notified by the Central Government.
(3) The Chairperson of the National Crisis Management Committee may
invite any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government for 5
taking part in any meeting of such Committee and shall exercise such powers
and perform such functions as the Central Government may determine.
(4) The procedure to be followed by the National Crisis Management
Committee, in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions, shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 10
High Level 8B. (1) The High Level Committee constituted by the Government of
Committee. India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management (Amendment)
Act, 2024, shall be the High Level Committee for the purposes of this Act
which shall provide the financial assistance as envisaged under section 46 to
the State Governments in the event of a disaster and approve the financial 15
assistance for mitigation needs under section 47.
(2) The High Level Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist
of the Minister in-charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control over the disaster management as
the Chairperson and such other members as may be notified by the Central 20
Government.”.
Amendment of 7. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following
section 10. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the National Executive Committee may,–– 25
(a) act as the coordinating body for disaster management;
(b) monitor the implementation of the National Plan and the plans
prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India;
(c) monitor, co-ordinate and give directions regarding the mitigation
and preparedness measures to be taken by different Ministries or 30
Departments and agencies of the Government of India;
(d) evaluate the preparedness at all governmental levels for the
purpose of responding to any threatening disaster situation or disaster
and provide necessary advice, where necessary, for enhancing such
preparedness; 35
(e) co-ordinate response in the event of any threatening disaster
situation or disaster;
(f) lay down guidelines, or give directions to, Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India, the State Governments and the
State Authorities concerned regarding measures to be taken by them in 40
response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;
(g) require any Ministry or Department or agency of the
Government to make available to the Central Government or State
Government such men or material resources as are available with it for
the purposes of emergency response, rescue and relief; 45
(h) advise, assist and co-ordinate the activities of the Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India, State Governments, statutory
bodies, other governmental or non-governmental organisations and
others engaged in disaster management;

(i) in the event of a disaster or a threatening disaster situation
affecting more than one State, issue directions for:—
(i) coordination between the States concerned;
(ii) containment measures as deemed necessary;
(iii) monitoring and forecasting the effects of the disaster
across multiple States;
(iv) deployment of specialised teams, material resources and
equipment;
(v) requisitioning of necessary resources and technical
1 0 capacities from public and private entities and their
deployment towards reducing the impact of the disaster;
(vi) adequate public awareness measures; and
(vii) coordination of support to individuals and communities
affected by containment measures; and
15 (j) perform such other functions as it may deem appropriate.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that
the expression “containment measures” means the actions and strategies
adopted at the individual, community, district, State, multi-State or national
levels aimed at controlling or slowing the spread of a disaster from its initial
focal area.’.
8. In section 11 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 11.
(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(2) The National Authority shall coordinate, in consultation with
2 5 the Central Government and the State Governments and other
stakeholders in the field of disaster management, for preparation and
approval of the National Plan having regard to the National Policy.”;
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
30 “(4) The National Authority shall review the National Plan once in
every three years and update at least once in every five years.”.
9. Sections 12 and 13 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
sections 12 and 13.
10. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– A mendment of
section 18.
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
3 5 “(b) co-ordinate the preparation, and approve the State Plan in
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;”;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ca) approve the District Plan and Urban Plan, prepared by the
District Authorities and Urban Authorities respectively, in accordance
4 0 with the National Plan and State Plan;”;
(iii) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(i) take stock of the entire range of disaster risks in the State,
periodically including emerging disaster risks, and take necessary
measures for their mitigation;
45 (j) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National
Policy, the National Plan and the State Plan;

(k) lay down guidelines for preparation of disaster management
plan by the Departments of the Government of the State, the District
Authorities and the Urban Authorities;
(l) promote general education, awareness and community training
in regard to the forms of disasters to which different parts of the State 5
are vulnerable and the measures that may be taken by such community
to prevent the disaster, mitigate and respond to such disaster;
(m) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to the
District Authorities, local authorities and Urban Authorities for
carrying out their functions effectively; 10
(n) provide information to the National Authority relating to
different aspects of disaster management;
(o) lay down guidelines for standards of relief to persons affected
by disasters in the State:
Provided that such standards shall in no case be less than the 15
minimum standards in the guidelines laid down by the National
Authority in this regard;
(p) maintain the State disaster database and provide inputs to the
National disaster database.”.
Omission of 11. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
section 19.
Amendment of 12. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the
section 20. following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(c) the Director General of Police of the State shall be member of the
State Executive Committee, ex officio.”.
Amendment of 13. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– 25
section 22.
(i) clauses (a) and (c) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (d), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words
“, the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted;
(iii) clause (i) shall be omitted;
(iv) in clause (j), after the words “District Authorities”, the words 3 0
“, Urban Authorities,” shall be inserted;
(v) clause (k) shall be omitted;
(vi) in clause (m), for the words “District Authority or the local
authority”, the words “District Authority, Urban Authority or the local
authority” shall be substituted; 35
(vii) clause (n) shall be omitted.
Amendment of 14. In section 23 of the principal Act,––
section 23.
(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(2) The State Authority shall coordinate the preparation of the 40
State Plan having regard to the National Plan and guidelines laid down
by the National Authority, and in consultation with local authorities,
District Authorities, Urban Authorities and the people’s representatives
as the State Authority may deem fit.”;
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 45
namely:––
“(3) The State Plan shall be approved by the State Authority.”;

(iii) in sub-section (4), for clause (a), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(a) the exposure of different parts of the State to different
hazards and vulnerability of its people, assets, infrastructure, livelihood
5 and economic activity to those hazards;”;
(iv) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(5) The State Authority shall review the State Plan once in every
three years and update atleast once in every five years.”.
10 15. In section 24 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “any Amendment of
District Authority”, the words “, any Urban Authority” shall be inserted. section 24.
16. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (f), the Amendment of
following clause shall be substituted, namely:–– section 25.
“(f) not exceeding two other Members to be appointed by the State
15 Government who may be taken from other district level officers, disaster
management experts and civil society organisation.”.
17. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the word Amendment of
“annually”, the words “at least once in every two years or earlier as necessary” section 31.
shall be substituted.
20 18. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 35.
(i) in clause (a), for the words “coordination of actions”, the words
“coordinate and monitor actions” shall be substituted;
(ii) clauses (b) and (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ha) notify the Ministries or Departments of the Government of
India which shall have the responsibility for monitoring, early warning,
prevention, mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard
to disasters arising from various hazards;”.
19. In section 36 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 36.
30 (i) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(f) provide assistance to the National Authority and State
Government for drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response
plans, capacity building, data collection and identification and training
of personnel in relation to disaster management;”;
35 (ii) in clause (g), after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clauses shall be
inserted, namely:––
“(vi) carrying out rescue and relief operations in the affected area;
(vii) assessing the damage from any disaster; and
(viii) carrying out the rehabilitation and re-construction;”.
40 20. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 38.
(i) in clause (a),––
(a) after the words “District Authorities”, the words “, Urban
Authorities” shall be inserted;
(b) for the words “local authority”, the words “local authorities”
45 shall be substituted;

(ii) in clause (b), for the words “and the District Authorities”, the
words “the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in clause (d), for the words “and the District Plans”, the words “,
the District Plans and the Urban Plans” shall be substituted; 5
(iv) in clause (i), for the words “and the District Authorities”, the words
“, the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted;
(v) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ia) notify State-specific hazard-wise nodal Departments, which
shall have the responsibility for monitoring, early warning, prevention, 10
mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard to disasters
arising from those State-specific hazards;”;
(vi) in clause (j), for the words “or the District Authorities”, the words
“, the District Authorities or the Urban Authorities” shall be substituted;
(vii) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–– 15
“(k) provide recovery and reconstruction assistance to the victims
of any disaster; and”.
Amendment of 21. In section 39 of the principal Act,––
section 39.
(a) in clause (f), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words
“District Authorities and Urban Authorities” shall be substituted; 20
(b) in clause (g), after the words “authorities at the district level”, the
words “and the Urban Plan by the Urban Authorities” shall be inserted;
(c) in clause (h), after the words “District Authorities”, the words “or
the Urban Authorities” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 22. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the 25
section 41. following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(e) prepare a disaster management plan as referred to in section 32.”.
Insertion of new 23. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 41A.
inserted, namely:––
Urban Disaster ‘41A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 30
Management
Gazette, constitute a separate Urban Disaster Management Authority for
Authority.
their State capitals and all cities having a Municipal Corporation, except for
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and Union territory of Chandigarh.
(2) The Urban Authority constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist
of the following, namely:–– 35
(i) the Municipal Commissioner—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) the District Collector of the District concerned—Vice
Chairperson, ex officio; and
(iii) such other members, with such pay and allowances as may
be determined by the State Government—members. 40
(3) The Urban Authority may have a separate Secretariat at such place
in the district as may be determined by the State Government.
(4) The Urban Authority shall be responsible for preparation of Urban
Plan, which shall be approved by the State Authority.
(5) The Urban Authority shall be responsible for coordinating the 45
implementation of the Urban Plan.

(6) The other functions and powers and such other matters relating to
the Urban Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expression
5 “Municipal Corporation” means a Municipal Corporation as referred to in
clause (c) of article 243Q of the Constitution.’.
24. For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 43.
“43. (1) The Central Government shall provide the National Institute of Officers,
employees,
10 Disaster Management with such officers, other employees and consultants,
experts and
as it considers necessary, for carrying out its functions. consultants of
National
(2) The National Institute may recruit experts as per norms approved Institute.
by the Central Government to perform such functions as provided in
sub-section (9) of section 42.
15 (3) The salaries, allowances payable to officers and employees and the
other terms and conditions of their service shall be such as may be
prescribed.”.
25. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, for the heading, the heading Amendment of
Chapter VIII.
“DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE” shall be substituted.
20 26. After section 44 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
section 44A.
inserted, namely:––
“44A. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official State Disaster
Response Force.
Gazette, constitute a State Disaster Response Force for the purpose of
specialist response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster.
25 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Disaster Response
Force shall be constituted in such manner, with such functions and the terms
and conditions of service of the members of such Force shall be such as may
be prescribed by the State Government concerned.”.
27. In section 46 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 46.
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “for meeting any threatening
disaster situation or disaster”, the words “for meeting different aspects of
disaster management” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
35 “(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1), shall be applied
in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Central
Government in consultation with the National Authority.”.
Amendment of
28. In section 47 of the principal Act,––
section 47.
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “for projects exclusively for the
40 purpose of mitigation”, the words “for meeting disaster mitigation needs”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1), shall be applied
in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Central
Government in consultation with the National Authority.”.
Amendment of
29. In section 48 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following
section 48.
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––

“(2) The State Government shall ensure that the funds established––
(i) under clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) are available to the
State Executive Committee and the State Authority respectively and
are applied as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government in
consultation with the National Authority; 5
(ii) under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) are available to
the District Authority.”.
Amendment of 30. In section 50 of the principal Act,—
section 50.
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “or the District Authority”,
the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted; 10
(ii) in clause (b), after the words “or District Authority”, the words “or
Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 31. In section 51 of the principal Act,––
section 51.
(i) in clause (a), after the words “or District Authority”, the words “or
Urban Authority” shall be inserted; 15
(ii) in clause (b), after the words “or the District Authority”, the words
“or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 32. In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District
section 52. Authority”, the words “, the District Authority or the Urban Authority” shall be
substituted. 20
Amendment of 33. Section 56 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1)
section 56. thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:––
“(2) Notwithstanding any action under sub-section (1), it shall be
lawful for the State Government on its own or on the directions given by the 25
Central Government to take such disciplinary action under the relevant rules,
against any officer who ceases or refuses to perform or withdraws himself
from the duties of his office or on grounds of insubordination or dereliction
of duty during a disaster:
Provided that the action taken by the State Government shall not be 30
inconsistent with the directions given by the Central Government.”.
Amendment of 34. In section 59 of the principal Act, for the word and figures “and 56”, the
section 59. words, brackets and figures “and sub-section (1) of section 56” shall be
substituted.
Amendment of 35. In section 60 of the principal Act, in clause (a) and clause (b), after the 35
section 60. words “the District Authority”, the words “, the Urban Authority” shall be
inserted.
Insertion of new 36. After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 60A. inserted, namely:—
Power of Central “60A.(1) The Central Government or the State Government may, by 40
Government or notification in the Official Gazette, require any person to take any action or
State
refrain from taking any action, in relation to the nature of the hazard, which
Government to
take action in in the opinion of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
relation to nature case may be, is required for reducing the impact of a disaster.
of hazard and
punishment for
its
contravention.

(2) Any notification issued under this section shall be valid for a period
specified therein or six months, whichever is earlier.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be liable
to pay a penalty as specified in the notification of the Central Government or
5 the State Government, as the case may be:
Provided that the penalty referred to in this sub-section shall not
exceed ten thousand rupees.”.
37. In section 61 of the principal Act, the words “compensation and” shall be Amendment of
omitted. section 61.
10 38. In section 63 of the principal Act, after the words “or District Authority”, Amendment of
the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted. section 63.
39. In section 64 of the principal Act, after the words “or the District Amendment of
Authority”, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
section 64.
40. In section 65 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 65.
15 (i) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, after the words “or
District Authority”, the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (3), for clause (a), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(a) “resources” includes human and material resources, and
20 equipment;”.
41. In section 67 of the principal Act, for the words “or a District Authority”, Amendment of
the words “, a District Authority or an Urban Authority” shall be substituted. section 67.
42. In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District Amendment of
Authority” occurring at both the places, the words “, a District Authority or an section 68.
25 Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
43. In section 69 of the principal Act, after the words “State Executive Amendment of
section 69.
Committee”, the words “National Authority, State Authority, District Authority or
Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
44. In section 71 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, Amendment of
section 71.
30 the words “, District Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
45. In section 73 of the principal Act, after the words “the District Authority” Amendment of
section 73.
occurring at both the places, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
46. In section 74 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, Amendment of
the words “, District Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted. section 74.
35 47. In section 75 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 75.
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(aa) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of officers, other employees, experts and consultants of the
National Authority under sub-section (3) of section 5;”;
40 (ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ca) the procedure to be followed by the National Crisis
Management Committee in exercise of its powers and discharging of
its functions under sub-section (4) of section 8A;”;
(iii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) the salaries, allowances and the other terms and conditions
of service of officers and other employees of the National Institute
under sub-section (3) of section 43;”.

Insertion of new 48. After section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 76A. inserted, namely:––
Power of “76A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 76, the National
National Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government may, by
Authority to
make notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations, other than regulations 5
regulations. made under section 76, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.”.
Amendment of 49. In section 77 of the principal Act, after the words “National Institute of
section 77. Disaster Management”, the words “and the National Authority” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 50. In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the 10
section 78. following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(fa) the powers, functions and other matters relating to Urban
Authority under sub-section (6) of section 41A;
(fb) the manner of constitution of State Disaster Response Force, its
functions and the terms and conditions of service of members of such Force 15
under sub-section (2) of section 44A;”.
51. In section 79 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1) and the proviso
Amendment of
section 79. thereunder, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by 20
the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024, the Central Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this sub-section after 25
the expiry of a period of three years from the date of commencement of the
Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024.”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 (the Act) was enacted to provide for the
effective management of disasters and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
2. The main purpose of the Act was to put in place necessary institutional
mechanisms for drawing up and monitoring the implementation of disaster
management plans, ensuring measures by various wings of Government for
prevention of and mitigating the effects of disasters and for undertaking a holistic,
coordinated and prompt response to any disaster or threatening disaster situation.
3. For achieving the said purpose, certain Authorities and Committees were
established at the national level, state level and District level. In addition, the Act
enumerated the measures to be taken up by the Ministries and Departments of the
Government of India and mandated that every Ministry or Department would carry
out the nodal responsibilities in respect of disaster management.
4. Due to the constant endeavour of the Central Government for
mainstreaming the Disaster Management in the development plans, aligning with
the recommendations of the Fifteenth Finance Commission, learnings from past
disasters, and experience gained during the implementation of the Act, the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 has been reviewed in consultation with all stakeholders
including State Governments.
5. In view of above, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of
the Act in the form of a Bill, namely, the Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill,
2024 which, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(i) to bring more clarity and convergence in the roles of Authorities and
Committees working in the field of disaster management;
(ii) to provide statutory status to certain pre-Act organisations like the
National Crisis Management Committee and the High Level Committee;
(iii) to strengthen the efficient working of the National Disaster
Management Authority and the State Disaster Management Authorities;
(iv) to empower the National Disaster Management Authority and the
State Disaster Management Authorities to prepare the disaster plan at
national level and state level instead of the National Executive Committee
and the State Executive Committee;
(v) to provide for creation of disaster database at national and state
level;
(vi) to make provision for constitution of “Urban Disaster Management
Authority” for State Capital and large cities having Municipal Corporation;
and
(vii) to make provision for constitution of “State Disaster Response
Force” by the State Government.
6. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 30th July, 2024.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to modify and substitute some definitions and
incorporate new definitions in section 2, such as disaster risk, evacuation, Exposure,
recovery, rehabilitation, resilience, Urban Authority, etc.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) in section 3 to
authorise the Vice-Chairperson or any Member of the National Authority to perform
the day-to-day functions of the Authority.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 5 related to appointment of
officers, other employees, consultants and experts and to empower the Central
Government to make rules with respect to their terms and conditions of service.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (b) in sub-section (2) of
section 6 for assigning the function of coordination of preparation of National Plan
to the National Authority; to modify clause (i) in sub-section (2) of section 6 to bring
more clarity on the type of measures to be taken by the National Authority under
this clause; and to insert new clauses from (k) to (w) in sub-section (2) in section 6
to bring more clarity on roles of National Authority, by assigning policy, plans and
guidelines related functions of National Executive Committee and to assign new
functions to the National Authority.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 8A in section 8, to bring the
existing National Crisis Management Committee, a nodal body to deal with major
disasters, under the Act and to insert a new section 8B, to bring the existing
High Level Committee under the Act, for approval of financial assistance.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) in section 10, to bring
more clarity on roles of National Executive Committee, by retaining coordination
and response related functions and assigning new functions to it in case of disasters
or threatening disaster situation affecting more than one State.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) in section 11 to make
provision that the National Authority will coordinate the preparation of the
National Plan and approve it; and to modify sub-section (4) in section 11 to make
the review and updation of National Plan, every three years and at least once in five
years respectively.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to omit sections 12 and 13 related to “Guidelines
for minimum standards of relief” and “Relief in loan repayment etc.” respectively.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to modify clause (b) in sub-section (2) of
section 18 for assigning the function of coordination of preparation of State Plan to
the State Authority; to insert new clause (ca) in sub-section (2) of section 18, for
assigning the role of approval of District Plan and Urban Plan, prepared by the
District Authorities and Urban Authorities respectively, to State Authority; and to
insert new clauses (i) to (p) in sub-section (2) of section 18 by assigning policy,
plans and guidelines related functions of State Executive Committee and to assign
new functions to State Authority.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to omit section 19 related to “Guidelines for
minimum standards of relief by State Authority”.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert new clause (c) in sub-section (2) of
section 20 making Director General of Police of the State a member of State
Executive Committee, ex officio.

Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to omit clauses (a), (c), (i), (k) and (n) in
sub-section (2) of section 22, as these functions have been transferred to the State
Authority; and to insert certain words related to Urban Authority in clauses (d), (j)
and (m) of sub-section (2) of section 22.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 23,
for assigning the coordination, preparation and approval of State Plan to the State
Authority; to substitute clause (a) under sub-section (4) in section 23, for including
hazard and vulnerability profile of different parts of the State in the State Plan; and
to substitute sub-section (5) of section 23 to make the review and updation of State
Plan, every three years and at least once in five years.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “any Urban Authority” after the
words “any District Authority” in clause (e) of section 24 and this amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to modify sub-section (4) of section 31, in order to
make the periodicity of revision of District Plan at least once in two years or earlier,
if necessary.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to modify clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 35; to omit clauses (b) and (d) under sub-section (2) of section 35, as these
functions are covered under section 10 (2) (c) and (d); and to insert new clause (ha)
in sub-section (2) of section 35, to notify the Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India for assigning responsibility for monitoring, early warning etc.
of various hazards.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (f) of section 36 to clearly
demarcate the functions of National Disaster Management Authority and National
Executive Committee; and to insert new clauses (vi), (vii) & (viii) after
sub-clause (v) in clause (g) of section 36, by shifting certain responsibilities of
Ministries or Department of Government of India towards the National Executive
Committee.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks, inter-alia, to insert new clause (ia) in
sub-section (2) of section 38, to notify State-specific hazard wise nodal Departments
for assigning responsibility for monitoring, early warning etc. for State specific
hazards; and to substitute the existing clause (k) in sub-section (2) in section 38, to
change “rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance” to “recovery and
reconstruction assistance”.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks, inter-alia, to insert the words “Urban Authorities”
in clauses (f), (g) and (h) of section 39 and this amendment is consequential in
nature.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert new clause in sub-section (1) after
clause (d) of section 41, to assign functions regarding preparation of disaster
management plan to Urban Authority.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 41A to enable State
Governments to constitute Urban Disaster Management Authority for State capitals
and cities having Municipal Corporation, with its composition, functions and
enabling provision for its Secretariat other than National Capital Territory of Delhi
and Union territory of Chandigarh.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 43 relating to “Officers,
employees, experts and consultants of National Institute of Disaster Management
and to empower the Central Government to prescribe their terms and conditions of
service.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend the heading of Chapter VIII to “DISASTER
RESPONSE FORCE”.

Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 44A to enable State
Government to constitute the State Disaster Response Force for strengthening
disaster response capability of States.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words in sub-section (1) of
section 46 related to constitution of National Disaster Response Fund by the Central
Government for meeting different aspects of disaster management; and further to
substitute sub-section (2) in section 46 to reflect the role of the laid down guidelines
in application of Response Fund.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words in sub-section (1) of
section 47 related to disaster mitigation needs; and further to substitute
sub-section (2) in section 47 to reflect the role of the laid guidelines in application
of Mitigation Fund.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of section 48 to reflect
the role of laid guidelines by the Central Government in application of State Disaster
Response Fund and State Disaster Mitigation Fund.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the
words “or the District Authority” in section 50 and the said amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the
words “or the District Authority” in clauses (a) and (b) of section 51 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to substitute certain words with the words “the
District Authority or the Urban Authority” in section 52 and the said amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to re-number section 56 as sub-section (1) of
section 56; and further to insert sub-section (2) in section 56, to empower the State
Government, on its own or on the directions given by the Central Government, to
take such disciplinary action against any officer on grounds of insubordination or
dereliction of duty etc. during a disaster, with a provision that action taken by the
State Government shall not be inconsistent with the directions given by the Central
Government in this regard.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to substitute the figures “56” with “sub-section (1)
of section 56” and the said amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “the Urban Authority” after the
words “the District Authority” in clause (a) and clause (b) of section 60 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 60A to empower the Central
and the State Governments to direct any person to take any action or refrain from
taking any action for reducing the impact of a disaster and to impose a penalty not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to omit the word "compensation" in section 61, as
the Governments provide only relief and not compensation to the victims of
disasters.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the
words “or District Authority” in section 63 and the said amendment is consequential
in nature.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or the Urban Authority” after
the words “or the District Authority” in section 64 and the said amendment is
consequential in nature.

Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or Urban Authority” after the
words “or District Authority” in sub-section (1) of section 65; and to modify
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of that section to include human and material resources
and equipment.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, a District Authority or an
Urban Authority” for the words “or a District Authority” in section 67 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, a District Authority or an
Urban Authority” for the words “or the District Authority” occurring at both places
in section 68 and the said amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “National Authority, State
Authority, District Authority, Urban Authority” after the words “State Executive
Committee” in section 69 to enable them to delegate power to their Chairperson.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, District Authority or
Urban Authority” for the words “or District Authority” in section 71 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “or the Urban Authority” after
the words “the District Authority” occurring at both places in section 73 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “, District Authority or
Urban Authority” for the words “or District Authority” in section 74 and the said
amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules in
certain matters.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 76A to empower the
National Authority also to make regulations.
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to insert the words “and by the National Authority”
after the words “National Institute of Disaster Management” in section 77 for laying
the regulations made by the National Authority in Parliament.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Government to make rules
in certain matters.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to amend section 79 related to “Power to removal
of difficulties”.

--·
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM TO THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
The Bill seeks to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The National
Disaster Management Authority (NOMA) and National Institute of Disaster Management
(NlDM) which have been set up under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 are already
in existence. The expenditure of these bodies is met from yearly Government Budgetary
Support.
2. The provrsions regarding salaries and allowances payable to the officers, other
employees and consultants of NOMA and NlDM are already in place under the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 and these provisions are slightly modified without any
substantive change. These provisions may result in expenditure in the discharge of
statutory functions of the Government in regular course of business, which would be
met from yearly budgetary support. However, any financial implication at this stage is
not quantifiable.
3. The expenditure for NOMA and NIDM constituted as statutory bodies under the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 would continue to be met from the yearly Budgetary
Support The Budget allocation for finandal year 2024-25 of NOMA and NIDM is Rs
'149.07 crore. Rs. 86.24 crore under Revenue Head, Rs. 52.37 crore under the Capital
Head and Rs. '10.~6 crore under Schemes. ---------·
------~·~~--

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Section 75 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 empowers the Central
Government to make rules consistent with the provisions of the Act for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. It is proposed to amend the said section [clause 47 of the
Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024], so as to make rules in the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
officers, other employees, experts and consultants of the National Authority
under sub-section (3) of section 5;
(b) the procedure to be followed by the National Crisis Management
Committee in exercise of its powers and discharging of its functions under
sub-section (4) of section 8A;
(c) the salaries, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service
of officers and other employees of the National Institute under sub-section (3)
of section 43.
2. It is proposed to insert a new section 76A in the Act vide clause 48 of the
Bill empowering the National Authority also to make regulations consistent with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
3. Section 78 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 empowers the State
Governments to make rules consistent with the provisions of the Act for carrying
out the provisions of the Act. It is proposed to amend the said section [clause 50 of
the Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024], so as to make rules in the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers, functions and other matters relating to Urban Authority
under sub-section (6) of section 41A;
(b) the manner of constitution of State Disaster Response Force and the
terms and conditions of service of Members of such Force under
sub-section (2) of section 44A.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005
( 53 OF 2005)
* * * * *
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) “disaster” means a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave
occurrence in any area, arising from natural or man made causes, or by
accident or negligence which results in substantial loss of life or human
suffering or damage to, and destruction of, property, or damage to, or
degradation of, environment, and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be
beyond the coping capacity of the community of the affected area;
(e) “disaster management” means a continuous and integrated process
of planning, organising, coordinating and implementing measures which are
necessary or expedient for—
* * * * *
(viii) rehabilitation and reconstruction;
* * * * *
(g) “District Plan” means the plan for disaster management for the
district prepared under section 31;
(h) “local authority” includes panchayati raj institutions,
municipalities, a district board, cantonment board, town planning authority
or Zila Parishad or any other body or authority, by whatever name called, for
the time being invested by law, for rendering essential services or, with the
control and management of civic services, within a specified local area;
(i) “mitigation” means measures aimed at reducing the risk, impact or
effects of a disaster or threatening disaster situation;
* * * * *
(m) “preparedness” means the state of readiness to deal with a
threatening disaster situation or disaster and the effects thereof;
* * * * *
(o) “reconstruction” means construction or restoration of any property
after a disaster;
* * * * *
Appointment of 5. The Central Government shall provide the National Authority with such
officers and officers, consultants and employees, as it considers necessary for carrying out the
other employees
functions of the National Authority.
of the National
Authority.
Powers and 6. (1) * * * * *
functions of
National (2) Without prejudice to generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
Authority. the National Authority may —
* * * * *
(b) approve the National Plan;
* * * * *

(i) take such other measures for the prevention of disaster, or the
mitigation, or preparedness and capacity building for dealing with the
threatening disaster situation or disaster as it may consider necessary;
* * * * *
10. (1) * * * * * Powers and
functions of
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in National
Executive
sub-section (1), the National Executive Committee may—
Committee.
(a) act as the coordinating and monitoring body for disaster
management;
(b) prepare the National Plan to be approved by the National Authority;
(c) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Policy;
(d) lay down guidelines for preparing disaster management plans by
different Ministries or Departments of the Government of India and the State
Authorities;
(e) provide necessary technical assistance to the State Governments
and the State Authorities for preparing their disaster management plans in
accordance with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;
(f) monitor the implementation of the National Plan and the plans
prepared by the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India;
(g) monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid down by the
National Authority for integrating of measures for prevention of disasters
and mitigation by the Ministries or Departments in their development plans
and projects;
(h) monitor, coordinate and give directions regarding the mitigation
and preparedness measures to be taken by different Ministries or
Departments and agencies of the Government;
(i) evaluate the preparedness at all governmental levels for the purpose
of responding to any threatening disaster situation or disaster and give
directions, where necessary, for enhancing such preparedness;
(j) plan and coordinate specialised training programme for disaster
management for different levels of officers, employees and voluntary rescue
workers;
(k) coordinate response in the event of any threatening disaster
situation or disaster;
(l) lay down guidelines for, or give directions to, the concerned
Ministries or Departments of the Government of India, the State
Governments and the State Authorities regarding measures to be taken by
them in response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;
(m) require any department or agency of the Government to make
available to the National Authority or State Authorities such men or material
resources as are available with it for the purposes of emergency response,
rescue and relief;
(n) advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India, State Authorities, statutory bodies,
other governmental or non-governmental organisations and others engaged
in disaster management;
(o) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to the State
Authorities and District Authorities for carrying out their functions under
this Act;

(p) promote general education and awareness in relation to disaster
management; and
(q) perform such other functions as the National Authority may require
it to perform.
National Plan. 11. (1) * * * * *
(2) The National Plan shall be prepared by the National Executive
Committee having regard to the National Policy and in consultation with the State
Governments and expert bodies or organisations in the field of disaster
management to be approved by the National Authority.
* * * * *
(4) The National Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.
* * * * *
Guidelines for 12. The National Authority shall recommend guidelines for the minimum
minimum standards of relief to be provided to persons affected by disaster, which shall
standards of
include,—
relief.
(i) the minimum requirements to be provided in the relief camps in
relation to shelter, food, drinking water, medical cover and sanitation;
(ii) the special provisions to be made for widows and orphans;
(iii) ex gratia assistance on account of loss of life as also assistance on
account of damage to houses and for restoration of means of livelihood;
(iv) such other relief as may be necessary.
13. The National Authority may, in cases of disasters of severe magnitude,
Relief in loan
repayment, etc. recommend relief in repayment of loans or for grant of fresh loans to the persons
affected by disaster on such concessional terms as may be appropriate.
* * * * *
18. (1) * * * * *
Powers and
functions of
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of provisions contained in sub-section (1),
State Authority.
the State Authority may—
* * * * *
(b) approve the State Plan in accordance with the guidelines laid down
by the National Authority;
* * * * *
19. The State Authority shall lay down detailed guidelines for providing
Guidelines for
minimum standards of relief to persons affected by disaster in the State:
standard of relief
by State Provided that such standards shall in no case be less than the minimum
Authority. standards in the guidelines laid down by the National Authority in this regard.
20. (1) * * * * *
Constitution of
State Executive
(2) The State Executive Committee shall consist of the following members,
Committee.
namely:—
* * * * *
(b) four Secretaries to the Government of the State of such departments
as the State Government may think fit, ex officio.
* * * * *

22. (1) * * * * * Functions of the
State Executive
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), Committee.
the State Executive Committee may—
(a) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National
Policy, the National Plan and the State Plan;
* * * * *
(c) lay down guidelines for preparation of disaster management plans
by the departments of the Government of the State and the District
Authorities;
(d) monitor the implementation of disaster management plans prepared
by the departments of the Government of the State and District Authorities;
* * * * *
(i) promote general education, awareness and community training in
regard to the forms of disasters to which different parts of the State are
vulnerable and the measures that may be taken by such community to
prevent the disaster, mitigate and respond to such disaster;
(j) advise, assist and coordinate the activities of the Departments of the
Government of the State, District Authorities, statutory bodies and other
governmental and non-governmental organisations engaged in disaster
management;
(k) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to District
Authorities and local authorities for carrying out their functions effectively;
* * * * *
(m) examine the construction, in any local area in the State and, if it is
of the opinion that the standards laid for such construction for the prevention
of disaster is not being or has not been followed, may direct the District
Authority or the local authority, as the case may be, to take such action as
may be necessary to secure compliance of such standards;
(n) provide information to the National Authority relating to different
aspects of disaster management;
* * * * *
23. (1) * * * * * State Plan.
(2) The State Plan shall be prepared by the State Executive Committee
having regard to the guidelines laid down by the National Authority and after such
consultation with local authorities, district authorities and the people's
representatives as the State Executive Committee may deem fit.
(3) The State Plan prepared by the State Executive Committee under
sub-section (2) shall be approved by the State Authority.
(4) The State Plan shall include,—
(a) the vulnerability of different parts of the State to different forms of
disasters;
* * * * *
(5) The State Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.
* * * * *

Powers and 24. For the purpose of, assisting and protecting the community affected by
functions of disaster or providing relief to such community or, preventing or combating
State Executive
disruption or dealing with the effects of any threatening disaster situation, the State
Committee in
the event of Executive Committee may—
threatening
disaster * * * * *
situation.
(e) give direction to the concerned Department of the Government of
the State, any District Authority or other authority, within the local limits of
the State to take such measure or steps for rescue, evacuation or providing
immediate relief saving lives or property, as may be necessary in its opinion;
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
Constitution of 25. (1) * * * * *
District Disaster
Management (2) The District Authority shall consist of the Chairperson and such number
Authority. of other members, not exceeding seven, as may be prescribed by the State
Government, and unless the rules otherwise provide, it shall consist of the
following, namely:—
* * * * *
(f) not exceeding two other district level officers, to be appointed by
the State Government.
* * * * *
District Plan. 31. (1) * * * * *
(4) The District Plan shall be reviewed and updated annually.
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
MEASURES BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Central 35 (1) * * * * *
Government to
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
take measures.
sub-section (1), the measures which the Central Government may take under that
sub-section include measures with respect to all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) coordination of actions of the Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India, State Governments, National Authority, State
Authorities, governmental and non-governmental organisations in relation to
disaster management;
(b) ensure the integration of measures for prevention of disasters and
mitigation by Ministries or Departments of the Government of India into
their development plans and projects;
* * * * *
(d) ensure that the Ministries or Departments of the Government of
India take necessary measures for preparedness to promptly and effectively
respond to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;
* * * * *
36. It shall be the responsibility of every Ministry or Department of the
Responsibilities
of Ministries or Government of India to—
Departments of
Government of * * * * *
India.

(f) provide assistance to the National Authority and State Governments
for—
(i) drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response plans,
capacity-building, data collection and identification and training of
personnel in relation to disaster management;
(ii) carrying out rescue and relief operations in the affected area;
(iii) assessing the damage from any disaster;
(iv) carrying out rehabilitation and reconstruction;
* * * * *
38. (1) * * * * * State
Government to
(2) The measures which the State Government may take under sub-section (1) take measures.
include measures with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) coordination of actions of different departments of the Government
of the State, the State Authority, District Authorities, local authority and
other non-governmental organisations;
(b) cooperation and assistance in the disaster management to the
National Authority and National Executive Committee, the State Authority
and the State Executive Committee, and the District Authorities;
* * * * *
(d) allocation of funds for measures for prevention of disaster,
mitigation, capacity-building and preparedness by the departments of the
Government of the State in accordance with the provisions of the State Plan
and the District Plans;
* * * * *
(i) ensure that different departments of the Government of the State and
the District Authorities take appropriate preparedness measures;
(j) ensure that in a threatening disaster situation or disaster, the
resources of different departments of the Government of the State are made
available to the National Executive Committee or the State Executive
Committee or the District Authorities, as the case may be, for the purposes of
effective response, rescue and relief in any threatening disaster situation or
disaster;
(k) provide rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance to the victims of
any disaster; and
* * * * *
39. It shall be the responsibility of every department of the Government of a Responsibilities
State to— of departments
of the State
* * * * * Government.
(f) provide assistance, as required, by the National Executive
Committee, the State Executive Committee and District Authorities, for—
(i) drawing up mitigation, preparedness and response plans,
capacity-building, data collection and identification and training of
personnel in relation to disaster management;
(ii) assessing the damage from any disaster;
(iii) carrying out rehabilitation and reconstruction;

(g) make provision for resources in consultation with the State Authority
for the implementation of the District Plan by its authorities at the district level;
(h) make available its resources to the National Executive Committee or
the State Executive Committee or the District Authorities for the purposes of
responding promptly and effectively to any disaster in the State, including
measures for—
(i) providing emergency communication with a vulnerable or
affected area;
(ii) transporting personnel and relief goods to and from the affected
area;
(iii) providing evacuation, rescue, temporary shelter or other
immediate relief;
(iv) carrying out evacuation of persons or live-stock from an area of
any threatening disaster situation or disaster;
(v) setting up temporary bridges, jetties and landing places;
(vi) providing drinking water, essential provisions, healthcare and
services in an affected area;
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Functions of the 41. (1) Subject to the directions of the District Authority, a local authority
local authority. shall—
(a) ensure that its officers and employees are trained for disaster
management;
(b) ensure that resources relating to disaster management are so maintained
as to be readily available for use in the event of any threatening disaster situation
or disaster;
(c) ensure all construction projects under it or within its jurisdiction
conform to the standards and specifications laid down for prevention of disasters
and mitigation by the National Authority, State Authority and the District
Authority;
(d) carry out relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities in the
affected area in accordance with the State Plan and the District Plan.
* * * * *
43. The Central Government shall provide the National Institute of Disaster
Officers and
other employees Management with such officers, consultants and other employees, as it considers
of the National necessary, for carrying out its functions.
Institute.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE
* * * * *
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
46.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
National
Disaster constitute a fund to be called the National Disaster Response Fund for meeting any
Response Fund. threatening disaster situation or disaster and there shall be credited thereto—

(a) an amount which the Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf provide;
(b) any grants that may be made by any person or institution for the
purpose of disaster management.
(2) The National Disaster Response Fund shall be made available to the National
Executive Committee to be applied towards meeting the expenses for emergency
response, relief and rehabilitation in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the
Central Government in consultation with the National Authority.
47. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, National
constitute a Fund to be called the National Disaster Mitigation Fund for projects Disaster
Mitigation Fund.
exclusively for the purpose of mitigation and there shall be credited thereto such
amount which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide.
(2) The National Disaster Mitigation Fund shall be applied by the National
Authority.
48. (1) * * * * * Establishment of
funds by State
(2) The State Government shall ensure that the funds established— Government.
(i) under clause (a) of sub-section (1) is available to the State Executive
Committee;
(ii) under sub-clause (c) of sub-section (1) is available to the State
Authority;
(iii) under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) are available to the District
Authority.
* * * * *
50. Where by reason of any threatening disaster situation or disaster, the Emergency
National Authority or the State Authority or the District Authority is satisfied that procurement and
accounting.
immediate procurement of provisions or materials or the immediate application of
resources are necessary for rescue or relief,—
(a) it may authorise the concerned department or authority to make the
emergency procurement and in such case, the standard procedure requiring
inviting of tenders shall be deemed to be waived;
(b) a certificate about utilisation of provisions or materials by the
controlling officer authorised by the National Authority, State Authority or
District Authority, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a valid document or
voucher for the purpose of accounting of emergency, procurement of such
provisions or materials.
CHAPTER X
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
51. Whoever, without reasonable cause— Punishment for
obstruction, etc
(a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central Government or the
State Government, or a person authorised by the National Authority or State
Authority or District Authority in the discharge of his functions under this Act;
or
(b) refuses to comply with any direction given by or on behalf of the
Central Government or the State Government or the National Executive
Committee or the State Executive Committee or the District Authority under this
Act,

shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine, or with both, and if such obstruction or
refusal to comply with directions results in loss of lives or imminent danger
thereof, shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years.
Punishment for 52. Whoever knowingly makes a claim which he knows or has reason to
false claim. believe to be false for obtaining any relief, assistance, repair, reconstruction or
other benefits consequent to disaster from any officer of the Central Government,
the State Government, the National Authority,
the State Authority or the District Authority, shall, on conviction be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and also with fine.
* * * * *
59. No prosecution for offences punishable under sections 55 and 56 shall be
Previous
sanction for instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or the State
prosecution. Government, as the case may be, or of any officer authorised in this behalf, by
general or special order, by such Government.
Cognizance of 60. No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on a
offences. complaint made by—
(a) the National Authority, the State Authority, the Central
Government, the State Government, the District Authority or any other
authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that Authority or
Government, as the case may be; or
(b) any person who has given notice of not less than thirty days in the
manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and his intention to make a
complaint to the National Authority, the State Authority, the Central
Government, the State Government, the District Authority or any other
authority or officer authorised as aforesaid.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
Prohibition 61. While providing compensation and relief to the victims of disaster, there
against shall be no discrimination on the ground of sex, caste, community, descent or
discrimination. religion.
* * * * *
63. Any officer or authority of the Union or a State, when requested by the
Powers to be
made available National Executive Committee, any State Executive Committee or District
for rescue Authority or any person authorised by such Committee or Authority in this behalf,
operations.
shall make available to that Committee or authority or person, such officers and
employees as requested for, to perform any of the functions in connection with the
prevention of disaster or mitigation or rescue or relief work.
Making or 64. Subject to the provisions of this Act, if it appears to the National
amending rules, Executive Committee, State Executive Committee or the District Authority, as the
etc., in certain
case may be, that provisions of any rule, regulation, notification, guideline,
circumstances.
instruction, order, scheme or bye-laws, as the case may be, are required to be made
or amended for the purposes of prevention of disasters or the mitigation thereof, it
may require the amendment of such rules, regulation, 25 notification, guidelines,
instruction, order, scheme or bye-laws, as the case may be, for that purpose, and
the appropriate department or authority shall take necessary action to comply with
the requirements.

65. (1) If it appears to the National Executive Committee, State Executive Power of
Committee or District Authority or any officer as may be authorised by it in this requisition of
resources,
behalf that—
provisions,
vehicles, etc., for
(a) any resources with any authority or person are needed for the
rescue
purpose of prompt response; operations, etc.
(b) any premises are needed or likely to be needed for the purpose of
rescue operations; or
(c) any vehicle is needed or is likely to be needed for the purposes of
transport of' resources from disaster affected areas or transport of resources
to the affected area or transport in connection with rescue, rehabilitation or
reconstruction, such authority may, by order in writing, requisition such
resources or premises or such vehicle, as the case may be, and may make
such further orders as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in
connection with the requisitioning.
* * * * *
(3) In this section,—
(a) “resources” includes men and material resources;
* * * * *
67. The National Authority, the State Authority, or a District Authority may Direction to
recommend to the Government to give direction to any authority or person in media for
communication
control of any audio or audio-visual media or such other means of communication
of warnings, etc.
as may be available to carry any warning or advisories regarding any threatening
disaster situation or disaster, and the said means of communication and media as
designated shall comply with such direction.
68. Every order or decision of the National Authority or the National Authentication
of orders or
Executive Committee, the State Authority, or the State Executive Committee or
decisions.
the District Authority, shall be authenticated by such officers of the National
Authority or the National Executive Committee or, the State Executive
Committee, or the District Authority, as may be authorised by it in this behalf.
69. The National Executive Committee, State Executive Committee, as the Delegation of
case may be, by general or special order in writing, may delegate to the powers.
Chairperson or any other member or to any officer, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and
functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.
* * * * *
71. No court (except the Supreme Court or a High Court) shall have Bar of
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of anything done, action jurisdiction of
court.
taken, orders made, direction, instruction or guidelines issued by the Central
Government, National Authority, State Government, State Authority or District
Authority in pursuance of any power conferred by, or in relation to its functions,
by this Act.
* * * * *
73. No suit or prosecution or other proceeding shall lie in any court against Action taken in
the Central Government or the National Authority or the State Government or the good faith.
State Authority or the District Authority or local authority or any officer or
employee of the Central Government or the National Authority or the State
Government or the State Authority or the District Authority or local authority or
any person working for on behalf of such Government or authority in respect of
any work done or purported to have been done or intended to be done in good faith
by such authority or Government or such officer or employee or such person under
the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.

Immunity from 74. Officers and employees of the Central Government, National
legal process. Authority, National Executive Committee, State Government, State Authority,
State Executive Committee or District Authority shall be immune from legal
process in regard to any warning in respect of any impending disaster
communicated or disseminated by them in their official capacity or any action
taken or direction issued by them in pursuance of such communication or
dissemination.
* * * * *
Rules and 77. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation
regulations to be made by the National Institute of Disaster Management under this Act shall be
laid before
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
Parliament.
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised of one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.
* * * * *
———

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister Home Affairs and Cooperation)