AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 74 of 2024
THE BHARATIYA VAYUYAN VIDHEYAK, 2024
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION
3. Directorate General of Civil Aviation.
4. Power of Director General of Civil Aviation to issue directions.
CHAPTER III
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY
5. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.
6. Power of Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to issue directions.
CHAPTER IV
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS INVESTIGATION BUREAU
7. Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau.
CHAPTER V
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
8. Superintendence of Central Government.
9. Power of Central Government to review orders passed under section 4 or section 6.
10. Power of Central Government to make rules.
11. Power of Central Government to make rules to implement Convention.
12. Power of Central Government to make rules for investigation of accidents.
13. Power of Central Government to make rules for protecting public health.
14. Emergency powers of Central Government for protecting public health.
15. Power of Central Government to make orders in emergency.
16. Power of Central Government to make rules for securing safe custody and re-delivery of
unclaimed property.
17. Power to detain aircraft.
18. Power of Central Government to prohibit or regulate construction of buildings, planting of
trees, and the like.

(ii)
CLAUSES
19. Power of Central Government to restrict, suspend or cancel licence, certificate or approval.
20. Power of Central Government to exempt certain aircraft.
21. Power of Central Government to delegate.
CHAPTER VI
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE
22. Manner of determination and payment of compensation for loss or damage.
23. Appeal from award in respect of compensation.
24. Arbitrator to have certain powers of civil courts.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
25. Penalty for contravention of rule made under this Act.
26. Penalty for flying so as to cause danger.
27. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under section 4 or section 6.
28. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under section 18.
29. Penalty for abetment of offences and attempted offences.
30. Composition of offences.
31. Cognizance of offences.
32. Adjudication of penalties.
33. Appeal.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
34. Rules to be made after publication.
35. Laying of rules before Parliament.
36. Power of Court to order forfeiture.
37. Wreck and salvage.
38. Use of patented invention on aircraft not registered in India.
39. Bar of certain suits.
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.
41. Savings of application of Act.
42. Power to remove difficulty.
43. Repeal and savings.

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 74 of 2024
THE BHARATIYA VAYUYAN VIDHEYAK, 2024
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of the design, manufacture, maintenance,
possession, use, operation, sale, export and import of aircraft and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024. Short title,
extent,
(2) It extends to the whole of India and applies to—
application and
(a) citizens of India wherever they may be; commencement.
(b) the aircraft, and the persons on aircraft, registered in India
wherever they may be;
10 (c) the aircraft, and the persons on aircraft, registered outside India,
but for the time being in or over India; and
(d) an aircraft operated by a person who is not a citizen of India but
has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(1) “aerodrome” means any definite or limited ground or water area
intended to be used, either wholly or in part, for the landing, departure and
surface movement of aircraft, and includes all buildings, sheds, vessels,
piers and other structures thereon or appertaining thereto;
(2) “aerodrome reference point”, in relation to any aerodrome, means
a designated point established in the horizontal plane at or near the
geometric centre of that part of the aerodrome reserved for the departure or 10
landing of aircraft;
(3) “aircraft” means any machine that can derive support in the
atmosphere from reactions of the air, other than reactions of the air against
the earth’s surface;
(4) “Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau” means the Aircraft 15
Accidents Investigation Bureau constituted under section 7;
(5) “Bureau of Civil Aviation Security” means the Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security constituted under section 5;
(6) “design” means the set of data and information that defines the
configuration of an aeronautical product type, its associated parts and 20
appliances for the purpose of airworthiness determination;
(7) “Directorate General of Civil Aviation” means the Directorate
General of Civil Aviation constituted under section 3;
(8) “export” means taking out of India;
(9) “import” means bringing into India;
(10) “maintenance” means the performance of the tasks on an aircraft,
engine, propeller or associated part required to ensure the continuing
airworthiness of an aircraft, engine, propeller or associated part including
any one or combination of overhaul, inspection, replacement, defect
rectification, and the embodiment of a modification or repair;
(11) “manufacture” means the performance of tasks that involve
assembly or production of aircraft, engine, propeller or associated parts and
appliances in conformity with its applicable design including prototype;
(12) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION
3. (1) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation constituted under the
D
G
i
e
r
n
e
e
c
r
t
a
o
l
r a
o
t
f
e
Aircraft Act, 1934 shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act, which 22 of 1934.
Civil shall be headed by an officer designated as the Director General of Civil Aviation
Aviation.
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official 40
Gazette.
(2) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall be responsible for
carrying out the safety oversight and regulatory functions in respect of matters
specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3) The administration of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall 45
vest in the Director General of Civil Aviation.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Civil
Aviation may also be exercisable by any other officer or authority specially
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government. 50

4. (1) The Director General of Civil Aviation or any other officer specially Power of
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government may, from time to time, by
Director General
of Civil
order, issue directions, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
Aviation to issue
thereunder, with respect to any of the matters specified in clauses (b), (e), (g), (i), (j), directions.
5 (k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), (s), (w), (zb), (zc), (zd) and (zf) of sub-section (2) of
section 10, to any person or persons using any aerodrome or engaged in the aircraft
operations, air traffic control, maintenance and operation of aerodrome,
communication, navigation, surveillance and air traffic management facilities and
safeguarding civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference, in any case where
10 the Director General of Civil Aviation or such other officer is satisfied that in the
interests of the security of India or for securing the safety of aircraft operations it is
necessary so to do.
(2) Every order passed under sub-section (1) shall be complied with by the
person to whom such order is issued.
15 CHAPTER III
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY
5. (1) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security constituted under the Aircraft Act, Bureau of Civil
Aviation
22 of 1934. 1934 shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act, which shall be headed
Security.
by an officer designated as the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
20 appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(2) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall be responsible for carrying out
the regulatory and oversight functions in respect of matters relating to civil aviation
security specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
25 (3) The administration of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall vest in the
Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security may also be exercisable by any other officer or authority specially
30 empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or any other Power of
Director General
officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government may, from time
of Bureau of
to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the
Civil Aviation
rules made thereunder, with respect to any of the matters specified in clauses (i), (j), Security to issue
35 (o), (ze), and (zg) of sub-section (2) of section 10, to any person or persons using any directions.
aerodrome, or engaged in the aircraft operations, air traffic control, maintenance and
operation of aerodrome, or safeguarding civil aviation against acts of unlawful
interference, in any case where the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security or such other officer is satisfied that in the interests of the security of India or
40 to ensure security of civil aviation operations, it is necessary so to do.
(2) Every person to whom the order is issued under sub-section (1) shall comply
with such order.
CHAPTER IV
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS INVESTIGATION BUREAU
45 7. (1) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau constituted under the Aircraft
22 of 1934. Aircraft Act, 1934 shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act, which
Accidents
Investigation
shall be headed by an officer designated as the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Bureau.
Investigation Bureau appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette.
50 (2) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall be responsible for
carrying out the functions in respect of matters relating to investigation of aircraft
accidents or incidents specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.

(3) The administration of the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall
vest in the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Aircraft
Accidents Investigation Bureau may also be exercisable by any other officer or 5
authority specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
CHAPTER V
POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
Superintendence 8. The superintendence of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, the
of Central Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau 10
Government.
shall vest in the Central Government, which shall have the power to issue
directions to each of these organisations, on any matters falling under
sub-section (2) of sections 3, 5 and 7, respectively, if it considers necessary or
expedient so to do in the public interest.
Power of 9. (1) Where the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so 15
Central to do in the public interest, it may, on receipt of a representation from any person
Government to
review orders
or otherwise, review any order passed by the Director General of Civil Aviation
passed under under section 4 or by the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
section 4 or under section 6 and issue such directions, as it deems fit, to the concerned Director
section 6.
General to rescind or modify the order so passed. 20
(2) The Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau
of Civil Aviation Security, as the case may be, shall comply with every direction
issued under sub-section (1) and either rescind or modify the order so passed by
him under section 4 or section 6, as the case may be.
Power of 10. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, 25
Central by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules regulating the design,
Government
manufacture, maintenance, possession, use, operation, sale, import or export of
to make rules.
any aircraft or class of aircraft and for securing the safety of aircraft operations.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for— 30
(a) the authorities by which any of the powers conferred by or under
this Act are to be exercised;
(b) the regulation of air transport services, and the prohibition of the
use of aircraft in such services except under the authority of and in
accordance with a licence authorising the establishment of the service; 35
(c) the economic regulation of civil aviation and air transport services,
including the approval, disapproval or revision on tariff of operators of air
transport services, other than the tariff referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 2008; the officers or authorities who may exercise powers in 40 27 of 2008.
this behalf; the procedure to be followed and the factors to be taken into
account by such officers or authorities; appeals to the Central Government
against orders of such officers or authorities and all other matters connected
with such tariff.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “tariff” includes fares,
rates, valuation charges and other charges for air transport of passengers or
goods, the rules, regulations, practices or services affecting such fares, rates,
valuation charges and other charges and the rates, terms and conditions of
commission payable to passenger or cargo sales agents;

(d) the information to be furnished by an applicant for, or the holder of,
a licence authorising the establishment of an air transport service to such
authorities as may be specified in the rules;
(e) the licensing, inspection and regulation of aerodromes, the
5 conditions under which aerodromes may be maintained and the prohibition
or regulation of the use of unlicensed aerodromes;
(f) the fees which may be charged at those aerodromes to which the
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 or the Airports Economic Regulatory
55 of 1994.
27 of 2008. Authority of India Act, 2008 does not apply or are not made applicable;
(g) the inspection and control of the design, manufacture, repair and
maintenance of aircraft and of places where aircraft are being designed,
manufactured, repaired or kept;
(h) the registration and marking of aircraft;
(i) the conditions under which aircraft may be flown, or may carry
15 passengers, mails or goods, or may be used for industrial purposes and the
certificates, licences or documents to be carried by aircraft;
(j) the inspection of aircraft or any facility for the design, manufacture,
maintenance, or operation of aircraft for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this Act and the rules thereunder;
20 (k) the licensing of persons employed in the operation, manufacture,
repair or maintenance of aircraft;
(l) the licensing of persons engaged in air traffic control;
(m) the certification and licensing of personnel engaged in the operation
of radio telephone or telegraph for the conduct of operation and maintenance
25 of aircraft and associated equipment;
(n) the certification, inspection and regulation of communication,
navigation and surveillance and air traffic management facilities;
(o) the measures to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful
interference;
30 (p) the regulation of air navigation services, that is, aeronautical
information services, aeronautical charting and cartography services,
aeronautical meteorological services, search and rescue services, procedure
for air navigation services and aircraft operations other than those referred to
in clause (n) and any other matter relating to air navigation services;
(q) the air-routes by which, and the conditions under which, aircraft
may enter or leave India, or may fly within or over India, and the places at
which aircraft shall land or take-off;
(r) the prohibition of flight by aircraft over any specified area, either
absolutely or at specified times, or subject to specified conditions and
40 exceptions;
(s) the supply, supervision and control of air-route beacons, aerodrome
lights, and lights at or in the neighbourhood of aerodromes or on or in the
neighbourhood of air-routes;
(t) the installation and maintenance of lights on private property in the
45 neighbourhood of aerodromes or on or in the neighbourhood of air-routes, by
the owners or occupiers of such property, the payment by the Central
Government for such installation and maintenance, and the supervision and
control of such installation and maintenance, including the right of access to
the property for such purposes;

(u) the signals to be used for purposes of communication by or to
aircraft and the apparatus to be employed in signaling;
(v) the prohibition and regulation of the carriage in aircraft of any
specified article, dangerous goods or substance;
(w) the measures to be taken and the equipment to be carried for the 5
purpose of ensuring the safety of life;
(x) the issue and maintenance of log-books;
(y) the manner and conditions of the issue or renewal of any licence,
certificate or approval under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the
examinations and tests to be undergone in connection therewith, the form, 10
custody, production, endorsement, cancellation, suspension or surrender of
such licence, certificate or approval, or of any log-book;
(z) the fees to be charged in connection with any inspection,
examination, test, certificate, licence or approval, made, issued or renewed
under this Act;
(za) the recognition for the purposes of this Act of licences and
certificates issued elsewhere than in India relating to aircraft or to the
qualifications of persons employed in the operation, manufacture, repair or
maintenance of aircraft;
(zb) the prohibition of slaughtering and flaying of animals and of 20
depositing rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter within a
radius of ten kilometres from the aerodrome reference point;
(zc) regulation for control of obstruction limiting surfaces around an
aerodrome or communication and navigation services facility;
(zd) safety oversight and regulatory functions; 25
(ze) security oversight and its regulatory functions;
(zf) the areas and manner in which the Director General of Civil
Aviation may issue directions for carrying out safety oversight and regulatory
functions and grant exemption from compliance with such directions;
(zg) the areas and manner in which the Director General of Bureau of 30
Civil Aviation Security may issue directions for carrying out security
oversight functions and grant exemption from compliance with such
directions;
(zh) to determine the amount of monetary penalty;
(zi) any matter subsidiary or incidental to the matters referred to in this 35
sub-section.
Power of 11. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may,
Central by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules as appear to it to be
Government
necessary for carrying out the Convention relating to International Civil Aviation
to make
rules to signed at Chicago on the 7th day of December, 1944 (including any Annex thereto 40
implement relating to international standards and recommended practices) as amended from
Convention.
time to time.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Telecommunications
Act, 2023, but subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, 44 of 2023.
by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules as may appear to it to be 45
necessary or expedient for the issuance of Radio Telephone Operator (Restricted)
Certificate and Licence to persons engaged in the operation and maintenance of
aircraft, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the International
Telecommunication Convention as amended from time to time.

12. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, Power of
Central
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules providing for the investigation
Government to
of any accident or incident arising out of or in the course of the navigation—
make rules for
investigation
(a) in or over India of any aircraft; or of accidents.
5 (b) anywhere of aircraft registered in India.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may—
(a) require notice to be given of any accident or incident in such manner
and by such person as may be specified therein;
10 (b) apply for the purposes of such investigation, either with or without
modification, the provisions of any law for the time being in force relating to
the investigation of accident or incident;
(c) prohibit pending investigation access to or interference with aircraft
to which an accident or incident has occurred, and authorise any person so
15 far as may be necessary for the purposes of an investigation to have access
to, examine, remove, take measures for the preservation of, or otherwise deal
with, any such aircraft; and
(d) authorise or require the cancellation, suspension, endorsement or
surrender of any licence or certificate granted or recognised under this Act
20 when it appears on an investigation that the licence ought to be so dealt with,
and provide for the production of any such licence for such purpose.
13. Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by Power of
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the prevention of danger arising Central
Government to
to the public health by the introduction or spread of any infectious or contagious
make rules for
25 disease from aircraft arriving at or being at any aerodrome and for the prevention protecting
of the conveyance of infection or contagion by means of any aircraft leaving an public health.
aerodrome and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of this
provision may make, with respect to aircraft and aerodromes or any specified
aerodrome, rules providing for any of the matters for which rules under
30 sub-clauses (i) to (viii) of clause (p) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Indian
15 of 1908. Ports Act, 1908, may be made with respect to vessels and ports.
14. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that India or any part thereof is Emergency
powers of
visited by or threatened with an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, and
Central
that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient Government
35 for the prevention of danger arising to the public health through the introduction or for protecting
spread of the disease by the agency of aircraft, the Central Government may take public health.
such measures as it deems necessary to prevent such danger.
(2) In any such case the Central Government may, without prejudice to the
powers conferred by section 13, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such
40 temporary rules with respect to aircraft and persons travelling or things carried
therein and aerodromes as it deems necessary in the circumstances.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, the power to make
rules under sub-section (2) shall not be subject to the condition of the rules being
made after previous publication, but such rules shall not remain in force for more
45 than three months from the date of notification:
Provided that the Central Government may by special order continue them in
force for a further period or periods of not more than three months in all.

Power of 15. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that in the interest of public
Central
safety or tranquillity the issue of all or any of the following orders is expedient, it
Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
to make
orders in
(a) cancel or suspend, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as
emergency.
it may think fit to specify in the order, all or any licence, certificate or 5
approval issued under this Act;
(b) prohibit, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as it may
think fit to specify in the order, or regulate in such manner as may be
contained in the order, the flight of all or any aircraft or class of aircraft over
the whole or any portion of India; 10
(c) prohibit, either absolutely, or conditionally, or regulate the erection,
maintenance or use of any aerodrome, aircraft facility, Flying Training
Organisation or place where aircraft are designed, manufactured, repaired or
kept, or any class or description thereof; and
(d) direct that any aircraft or class of aircraft or any aerodrome, aircraft 15
facility, Flying Training Organisation or place where aircraft are designed,
manufactured, repaired or kept, together with any machinery, plant, material
or things used for the design, operation, manufacture, repair or maintenance
of aircraft shall be delivered, either forthwith or within a specified time, to
such authority and in such manner as it may specify in the order, to be at the
disposal of that Government for the public service.
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any rule made under this Act.
(3) Any person who suffers direct injury or loss by reason of any order made
under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be paid such compensation 25
as may be determined by such authority as the Central Government may appoint in
this behalf.
(4) The Central Government may authorise such steps to be taken to secure
compliance with any order made under sub-section (1) as appear to it to be
necessary. 30
(5) Whoever knowingly disobeys, or fails to comply with, or does any act in
contravention of, an order made under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both, and the Court by which he is convicted may direct that the aircraft or thing
(if any) in respect of which the offence has been committed, or any part of such 35
thing, shall be forfeited to the Central Government.
Power of 16. Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by
Central notification in the Official Gazette, make rules which may provide for securing the
Government
safe custody and re-delivery of any property which, while not in proper custody, is
to make
rules for found on any aerodrome or in any aircraft on any aerodrome and any such rules 40
securing safe may, in particular, provide for—
custody and
re-delivery (a) the payment of charges in respect of any such property before it is
of unclaimed re-delivered to the person entitled thereto; and
property.
(b) the disposal of any such property in cases where the same is not
re-delivered to the person entitled thereto before the expiration of such period 45
as may be specified therein.
Power to 17. (1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government
detain
may detain any aircraft, if in the opinion of such authority—
aircraft.
(a) having regard to the nature of an intended flight, the flight of such
aircraft would involve danger to persons in the aircraft or to any other person 50
or property; or

(b) such detention is necessary to secure compliance with any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules applicable to such aircraft; or such
detention is necessary to prevent a contravention of any rule made under
clause (q) or clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 10 or to implement any
5 order made by any court.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules regulating all matters incidental or
subsidiary to the exercise of this power.
18. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or Power of
10 expedient so to do for the safety of aircraft operations, it may, by notification in Central
Government to
the Official Gazette,—
prohibit or
(a) direct that no building or structure shall be constructed or erected, regulate
construction of
or no tree shall be planted on any land within such radius, not exceeding
buildings,
twenty kilometres from the aerodrome reference point, as may be specified planting of
15 in the notification and where there is any building, structure or tree on such trees, and the
land, also direct the owner or the person having control of such building,
like.
structure or tree to demolish such building or structure or, as the case may be,
to cut such tree within such period as may be specified in the notification;
(b) direct that no building or structure higher than such height as may
20 be specified in the notification shall be constructed or erected, or no tree,
which is likely to grow or ordinarily grows higher than such height as may
be specified in the notification, shall be planted, on any land within such
radius, not exceeding twenty kilometres from the aerodrome reference point,
as may be specified in the notification and where the height of any building
25 or structure or tree on such land is higher than the specified height, also direct
the owner or the person having control of such building, structure or tree to
reduce the height thereof so as not to exceed the specified height, within such
period as may be specified in the notification.
(2) In specifying the radius under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1)
30 and in specifying the height of any building, structure or tree under the said
clause (b), the Central Government shall have regard to—
(a) the nature of the aircraft operated or intended to be operated in the
aerodrome; and
(b) the international standards and recommended practices governing
35 the operation of aircraft.
(3) Where any notification has been issued under sub-section (1) directing
the owner or the person having control of any building, structure or tree to demolish
such building or structure or to cut such tree or to reduce the height of any building,
structure or tree, a copy of the notification containing such direction shall be served
40 on the owner or the person having the control of the building, structure or tree, as
the case may be,—
(a) by delivering or tendering it to such owner or person; or
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by delivering or tendering
it to any officer of such owner or person or any adult member of the family
45 of such owner or person or by affixing a copy thereof on the outer door or on
some conspicuous part of the premises in which such owner or person is
known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for
gain or delivering by mail or any other electronic means; or
(c) failing service by any of the means specified in clause (a) or
clause (b), by post.
(4) Every person shall be bound to comply with any direction contained in
any notification issued under sub-section (1).

Power of 19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any person
Central
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made or the directions
Government
issued thereunder, the Central Government or any officer authorised in this behalf,
to restrict,
suspend or may impose any restriction or suspend or cancel the licence, certificate or approval
cancel issued to such person under this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed. 5
licence,
certificate or
(2) On being satisfied that there has been contravention of the provisions of
approval.
the Act or the rules made or directions issued under this Act by any person, the
Central Government or any officer authorised under sub-section (1) may, by an
order in writing,––
(i) suspend or cancel the licence, certificate or approval; or 10
(ii) impose restrictions on the licence, certificate or approval,
issued to such person stating the nature of contravention of the respective
provisions of the Act, rule or the direction which has been contravened and the
reasons for such suspension or cancellation or imposition of restriction.
(3) The Central Government or the officer authorised under sub-section (1) 15
shall, before passing an order under sub-section (2), give an opportunity of being
heard to the person concerned.
(4) The Central Government may, in the rules made under this section,
specify the grounds on which the licence, certificate or approval may be suspended
or the circumstances under which such restrictions may be imposed with 20
immediate effect.
Power of 20. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and
Central for the reasons provided therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions of this
Government
Act or the rules made thereunder, any aircraft or class of aircraft and any person or
to exempt
certain class of persons, or may direct that such provisions shall apply to such aircraft or 25
aircraft. persons subject to such modifications as may be specified in the notification.
Power of 21. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
Central direct that the powers (except the power to make rules under this Act) exercisable
Government
to delegate.
by it under this Act may also be exercisable by the Director General of Civil
Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or the 30
Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau or any other officer or
authority specifically empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
CHAPTER VI
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE
Manner of 22. (1) If in consequence of any direction contained in any notification issued 35
determination under sub-section (1) of section 18, any person sustains any loss or damage, such
and payment
person shall be paid compensation the amount of which shall be determined in the
of
compensation manner and in accordance with the principles hereinafter set out, that is to say,—
for loss or
damage. (a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it
shall be paid in accordance with such agreement; 40
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Government
shall appoint as arbitrator a person who is or has been qualified for
appointment as a Judge of a High Court;
(c) the Central Government may, in any particular case, nominate a
person having adequate knowledge as to the nature of the loss or damage 45
suffered by the person to be compensated and where such nomination is
made, the person to be compensated may also nominate an assessor for the
same purpose;

(d) at the commencement of the proceedings before the arbitrator, the
Central Government and the person to be compensated shall state what, in
their respective opinion, is a fair amount of compensation;
(e) the arbitrator shall, after hearing the dispute, make an award
5 determining the amount of compensation which appears to him to be just and
specify the person or persons to whom such compensation shall be paid; and
in making the award he shall have regard to the circumstances of each case
and,—
(i) the damage sustained by the person to be compensated in his
10 earnings;
(ii) if in consequence of any direction contained in any
notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 18, the market value
of the land immediately after the issue of such notification is
diminished, the diminution in such market value;
15 (iii) where any building or structure has been demolished or any
tree has been cut or the height of any building, structure or tree has been
reduced in pursuance of any direction, the damage sustained by the
person to be compensated in consequence of such demolition, cutting
or reduction and the expenses incurred by such person for such
20 demolition, cutting or reduction;
(iv) if the person to be compensated is compelled to change his
residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, that may
have to be incurred by him incidental to such change;
(f) where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who are
25 entitled to the compensation, the arbitrator shall decide such dispute and if
the arbitrator finds that more persons than one are entitled to compensation,
he shall apportion the amount thereof amongst such persons;
(g) nothing in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to
26 of 1996.
arbitrations under this section.
30 (2) Every award made by the arbitrator under clause (e) of sub-section (1)
shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the proceedings before it and by
what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
23. Any person aggrieved by an award of the arbitrator made under Appeal from
section 22 may, within thirty days from the date of such award, prefer an appeal to award in
35 the High Court within whose jurisdiction the aerodrome is situate:
respect of
compensation.
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
24. The arbitrator appointed under section 22, while holding arbitration Arbitrator to
proceedings under this Act, shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a have certain
5 of 1908. suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, powers of civil
courts.
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
45 (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.

CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Penalty for 25. (1) If any person contravenes any provision of any rule made under
contravention clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 10 prohibiting or regulating the carriage in
of rule made
under this aircraft of arms, explosives or other dangerous goods, or when required under the 5
Act. rules made under that clause to give information in relation to any such goods gives
information which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or
does not believe to be true, he, and if he is not the owner, the owner also (unless
the owner proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge, consent
or connivance) shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two 10
years, or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
(2) If any person contravenes any provision of any rule made under
clause (zb) of sub-section (2) of section 10 prohibiting the slaughter and flaying of
animals and of depositing rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matters
within a radius of ten kilometres from the aerodrome reference point, he shall be 15
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 an offence referred to in sub-section (2) shall be cognizable. 46 of 2023.
(4) In making any other rule under section 10, section 11, section 12, 2 0
section 13, section 14 or section 17, the Central Government may, direct that a
breach of it shall be punishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend
to two years, or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
Penalty for 26. Whoever wilfully flies any aircraft in such a manner as to cause danger
flying so as to any person or to any property on land or water or in the air shall be punishable 25
to cause
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
danger.
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
Penalty for 27. If any person wilfully fails to comply with any direction issued under
failure to
section 4 or section 6, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
comply with
directions may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, or with 30
issued under both.
section 4 or
section 6.
Penalty for 28. (1) If any person wilfully fails to comply with any direction contained in
failure to any notification issued under section 18, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
comply with
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one
directions
issued under crore rupees, or with both.
section 18.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if any person fails
to demolish any building or structure or cut any tree or fails to reduce the height of
any building, structure or tree in pursuance of any direction contained in any
notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 18 within the period specified
in the notification, then, subject to such rules as the Central Government may make 40
in this behalf, it shall be competent for any officer authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf to demolish such building or structure or cut such tree
or reduce the height of such building, structure or tree:
Provided that the power to make rules under this sub-section shall be subject
to the provisions of section 34.
Penalty for 29. Whoever abets the commission of any offence under this Act or the rules
abetment of or attempts to commit such offence, and in such attempt does any act towards the
offences and
commission of the offence, shall be liable to the punishment provided for the
attempted
offences. offence.

30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Composition
of offences.
46 of 2023. Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under this Act or under any rules
made thereunder, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or
punishable with imprisonment and also with fine, may be compounded, either
5 before or after the institution of any prosecution, by the Director General of Civil
Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or Director
General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the case may be, in such
manner, and for such amount not exceeding one crore rupees, as may be
prescribed.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed
by a person for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the
date of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded or for
which such person was earlier convicted.
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the powers to
15 compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the
Central Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any
prosecution, no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence by an
officer referred to in sub-section (1) against the offender in relation to whom the
offence is so compounded.
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought to the notice of the court in which
25 the prosecution is pending, in writing, by the officer referred to in sub-section (1),
and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person against
whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(7) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of
an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded.
30 (8) No offence specified in sub-section (1) shall be compounded except as
provided in this section.
31. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Cognizance of
Act, save on a complaint made by or with the previous sanction in writing by the offences.
Director General of Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
35 Security or Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the
case may be.
(2) The complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made within a period
of one year from the date on which the offence came to the knowledge of the
Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil
40 Aviation Security or the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation
Bureau, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
46 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023, no court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of
the first class shall try the offences under this Act.
45 32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 25, the Central Adjudication
Government may, in making any rule under section 10, section 11, section 12, of penalties.
section 13, section 14, or section 17, provide for imposition of penalty, not
exceeding one crore rupees as may be prescribed, for the contravention of any rule.
(2) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
50 Gazette, appoint such number of officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary
to the Government of India or equivalent, as it considers necessary, to be
designated officers for adjudging penalty under sub-section (1), in such manner as
may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Government may, while appointing designated officers under
sub-section (2), also specify their jurisdiction in that order.
(4) Where the designated officer is satisfied that any contravention of the
provisions of the rules has been committed by any person, he may, by an order in writing,
impose penalty on such person stating the nature of contravention, the provision of rules 5
which has been contravened and the reasons for imposing such penalty:
Provided that the designated officer shall, before imposing any penalty, give
an opportunity of being heard to such person:
Provided further that the designated officer shall not proceed for imposition
of penalty under sub-section (4), if an action under this Act other than the 10
imposition of such penalty has been initiated for contravention of same provision
on the same cause of action.
Appeal. 33. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order made under sub-section (2) of
section 19 or under sub-section (4) of section 32, may prefer an appeal to the First
Appellate Officer having jurisdiction in the matter who is next higher in rank to 15
such officer who has passed the order.
(2) The First Appellate Officer may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the parties, pass such order, as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or
setting aside the order appealed against.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the First Appellate Officer, 20
may prefer an appeal to the Second Appellate Officer having jurisdiction in the
matter who is next higher in rank to the First Appellate Officer.
(4) The Second Appellate Officer may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the parties, pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or
setting aside the order passed by the First Appellate Officer. 25
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the
appeal under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (3) against an order passed by
the Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security shall lie to the Central Government.
(6) Where any order under sub-section (5) is passed by the Central 30
Government, no further appeal shall lie against such order.
(7) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the
date of receipt of the copy of the order passed, and in such form and manner and
accompanied with such documents and fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the said period may be extended by such further period, for 35
reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding thirty days.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
34. Any power to make rules conferred by this Act is subject to the condition
Rules to be
made after of the rules being made after previous publication: 4 0
publication.
Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest, by order in
writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication in any case.
35. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
Laying of
rules before made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of
Parliament. thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 45
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 50
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

36. Where any person is convicted of an offence punishable under P o w er of
Court to order
sub-section (1) of section 25 or under any rule made under clause (r) of
forfeiture.
sub-section (2) of section 10, the Court by which he is convicted may direct that
the aircraft or article or substance, as the case may be, in respect of which the
5 offence has been committed, shall be forfeited to the Central Government.
44 of 1958. 37. (1) The provisions of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, Wreck and
relating to Wreck and Salvage shall apply to aircraft on or over the sea or tidal salvage.
water as they apply to ships, and the owner of an aircraft shall be entitled to a
reasonable reward for salvage services rendered by the aircraft in like manner as
10 the owner of a ship.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make such modifications of the said provisions in their application to aircraft as
appear necessary or expedient.
38. The provisions of the Patents Act, 1970 shall apply to the use of an Use of
39 of 1970.
invention on any aircraft not registered in India in like manner as they apply to the patented
invention on
use of an invention in a foreign vessel.
aircraft not
registered in
India.
39. No suit shall be brought in any civil court in respect of trespass or in Bar of certain
respect of nuisance by reason only of the flight of aircraft over any property at a suits.
height above the ground which having regard to wind, weather and all the
20 circumstances of the case is reasonable, or by reason only of the ordinary incidents
of such flight.
40. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person Protection of
for anything done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act. action taken in
good faith.
41. Nothing in this Act or in any order or rule made thereunder other than a Savings of
25 rule made under section 13 or under section 14 shall apply to or in respect of any a
A
p
c
p
t
l
.
ication of
aircraft belonging to or exclusively employed in the Navy, Army or Air Force of
the Union or other armed forces of the Union constituted by any law for the time
being in force, or to any person in such forces employed in connection with such
aircraft:
30 Provided that any aircraft belonging to an armed forces of the Union other
than Navy, Army or Air Force of the Union, for which the provisions of the Act
which is repealed under section 43, and the rules made thereunder were applicable
on the date of commencement of this Act, shall continue to be so governed by this
Act and the rules made thereunder till such date as the Central Government may,
3 5 by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
42. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, Power to
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such remove
difficulty.
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
40 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.

Repeal and 43. (1) The Aircraft Act, 1934 is hereby repealed. 22 of 1934.
savings.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (1),
anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken, 5
including any rule, regulation, notification, inspection or order made or issued; or
any licence, certificate, approval, permission or exemption granted; or any
document or instrument executed; or any direction issued; or any proceedings
taken or any penalty, punishment, forfeiture or fine imposed under the Act so
repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 1 0
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses
10 of 1897.
Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeal.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934) was enacted to make better provision for
the control of the manufacture, possession, use, operation, sale, import and export
of aircraft.
2. The regulation of civil air transport within the territory and the airspace
above India, including regulation of international air services of national and
foreign air carriers is the sovereign function of the Government of India and the
same is given effect to under this Act, having regard to the international
regulations, bilateral and multilateral agreements and arrangements to which India
is a contracting party or which has been acceded to or ratified by India.
3. The Aircraft Act, 1934 has been amended several times to enhance safety,
oversight and to meet requirements for sustainable growth of aviation sector and
to give effect to the provisions of international conventions. As a result of
numerous amendments over a period of ninety years, a need is felt to address the
ambiguities and confusion experienced by the stakeholders, to remove
redundancies, to enable ease of doing business and to provide for manufacture and
maintenance in the aviation sector and to re-enact the aforesaid Act in the form of
a Bill, namely, the Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024.
4. The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024, inter alia, seeks to––
(a) provide for design, manufacture and maintenance of aircraft and
related equipment;
(b) empower the Central Government to regulate issuance of Radio
Telephone Operator (Restricted) Certificate and licence to provide for ease
of business;
(c) empower the Central Government to make rules to implement the
Convention relating to international civil aviation and the other matters
relating to civil aviation security;
(d) empower the Central Government to issue orders in emergency in
the interest of public safety or tranquility;
(e) provide for payment of compensation for loss or damage in such
manner as provided under the Act;
(f) provide for appeal against the matters relating to compensation,
licence, certificate or approval and adjudication of penalties;
(g) provide for imprisonment, fine or penalties for contravention of the
provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder;
(h) remove ambiguities and redundancies;
(i) provide for repeal of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and saving of acts done
under the said Act; and
(j) other regulatory provisions for effective implementation of the
proposed legislation.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; RAMMOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU.
The 24th July, 2024.

Notes on clauses
Clause 1 provides for the short title, extent, application and commencement
of the Bill.
Clause 2 defines various terms and expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 provides for the constitution of the Directorate General of Civil
Aviation responsible for safety and regulatory oversight and regulatory functions,
appointment of the Director General of Civil Aviation and delegation of powers of
Director General of Civil Aviation to other officer or Authority.
Clause 4 provides for the power of the Director General of Civil Aviation to
issue in the interests of the security of India or for securing the safety of aircraft
operations.
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security for implementation regulatory and oversight functions in respect of
matters relating to civil aviation security, appointment of the Director General of
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and the delegation of powers of the Director
General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to other officer or Authority.
Clause 6 provides for power of the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security to issue directions in the interests of the security of India or to
ensure security of civil aviation operations.
Clause 7 provides for the constitution of the Aircraft Accidents Investigation
Bureau for investigation of accident or incident of aircrafts, appointment of the
Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau and delegation of
powers of the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau to other
officer or Authority.
Clause 8 provides for the power of the Central Government to exercise
overall supervision of the statutory authorities constituted under this Act.
Clause 9 provides for power of the Central Government to review orders
passed by the Director General of Civil Aviation under clause 4 or by the Director
General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security under clause 6 and for compliance of
directions issued upon such review.
Clause 10 provides for general power of the Central Government to make
rules regulating the design, manufacture, possession, use, operation, sale, export or
import of any aircraft or class of aircraft and for securing the safety of aircraft
operations.
Clause 11 provides for power of the Central Government to make rules for
implementing Chicago Conventions, 1944 and International Telecommunication
Convention and implement the Standard and Recommended Practices of Annex
to the Chicago Convention and to the provisions of International
Telecommunication Convention related to issuance of Radio Telephone Operator
(Restricted) Certificate and licences.
Clause 12 provides for power of the Central Government to make rules for
the investigation of accident or incident of aircraft.
Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules for protecting
public health.
Clause 14 provides for emergency powers of the Central Government for
protecting public health.
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to issue orders in emergency
in the interest of public safety or tranquility.

Clause 16 provides for power of the Central Government to make rules for
securing safe custody and re-delivery of unclaimed property found on any
aerodrome or in any aircraft on any aerodrome.
Clause 17 provides for detention of aircraft and the conditions for such
detention of the aircraft and power of the Central Government to make rules for
regulating all matters incidental or subsidiary to the exercise of the power to detain
aircraft.
Clause 18 provides for power of the Central Government to prohibit or
regulate construction of buildings, planting of trees, etc., for the safety of aircraft
operations.
Clause 19 provides for power of the Central Government to restrict, suspend
or cancel licence, certificate or approval issued under the provisions of the Act for
non-compliance of provisions of the Act.
Clause 20 provides for power of the Central Government to grant exemption
to any aircraft or class of aircraft and any person or class of persons in public
interest.
Clause 21 provides for delegation of its powers by the Central Government
to the Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security or the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation
Bureau or any other officer or authority.
Clause 22 provides for manner of determination and payment of
compensation for loss or damage due to order of demolition of building, structure,
etc., and provisions for arbitration where amount of compensation cannot be fixed
by an agreement between the parties.
Clause 23 provides for appeal from arbitral award under clause 22 in respect
of compensation for loss or damage due to order of demolition of building,
structure, etc.
Clause 24 provides for powers of arbitrator appointed under clause 22 of this
Act.
Clause 25 provides the penalty for contravention of rules made under this
Act.
Clause 26 provides the penalty for flying so as to cause danger.
Clause 27 provides the penalty for violation of direction issued under
clause 4 or clause 6 of this Act.
Clause 28 provides the penalty for failure to comply with directions issued
under clause 18 of this Act.
Clause 29 provides the penalty for abetment of offences and attempted
offences.
Clause 30 provides for the power and procedure for compounding of offence.
Clause 31 provides for cognizance of offences under this Act by court only
on a complaint made by or with the previous sanction of the Director General of
Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or Director
General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau.
Clause 32 provides for power and procedure for adjudication and imposition
of financial penalty by the designated officer and protection from double jeopardy.
Clause 33 provides for provisions relating to appeal against the order made
under sub-clause (2) of clause 19 or under sub-clause (4) of clause 32 and the
procedure thereof.

Clause 34 provides for previous publication of rules for consideration of the
public opinion and exemption from the requirement of prior publication in public
interest.
Clause 35 provides that all rules made under the Act shall be laid before
Parliament.
Clause 36 provides for power of Court to order forfeiture upon conviction
for an offence punishable under sub-clause (1) of clause 25 or under any rule made
under item (r) of sub-clause (2) of clause 10 under this Act.
Clause 37 provides for payment of reasonable reward for salvage services
rendered for wreck and salvage by the aircraft engaged in search and rescue.
Clause 38 provides for application of the Patents Act, 1970 to the use of an
invention on any aircraft not registered in India in the like manner as they apply to
the use of an invention in a foreign vessel.
Clause 39 provides for Bar of certain suits in respect of trespass or in respect
of nuisance by reason of only of flight of aircraft over any property at a reasonable
height above the ground or by reason of ordinary incidents of such flight.
Clause 40 provides for saving from prosecution or other legal proceedings
for acts done in good faith under this Act.
Clause 41 provides that nothing in this Act or in any order or rule made
thereunder other than a rule made under clause 13 or under clause 14 shall apply
to or in respect of any aircraft belonging to or exclusively employed in the naval,
military or air forces of the Union or other armed forces of the Union or to any
person in such forces employed in connection with such aircraft. The proviso
provides that any aircraft belonging to an armed forces of the Union other than
naval, military or air force of the Union, for which the provisions of the Act which
is repealed under clause 43 were applicable on the date of commencement of this
Act, shall continue to be so governed by this Act.
Clause 42 provides for power of the Central Government to remove difficulty
in giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
Clause 43 provides for repeal of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and savings of the
acts done under the said Act.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to repeal and re-enact the Aircraft Act, 1934. The Directorate
General of Civil Aviation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and Aircraft Accident
Investigation Bureau which have been set up under the Aircraft Act, 1934 are
already in existence. The expenditure of these bodies is met from yearly
Government Budgetary Support. The Bill does not propose to create any new body
resulting in additional financial implication.
2. The provisions regarding emergency powers of the Central Government
for protecting public health and the manner of determination and payment of
compensation for loss or damage are already in place under the Aircraft Act, 1934
and no change is proposed in the said sections. These provisions may result in
expenditure in the discharge of statutory functions of the Government in regular
course of business, which would be met from yearly budgetary support. However,
any financial implication at this stage is not quantifiable.
3.The Bill has no financial implication and does not involve any additional
expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make
rules regulating the design, manufacture, maintenance, possession, use, operation,
sale, export or import of any aircraft or class of aircraft and for securing the safety
of aircraft operations.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for carrying out the
Convention relating to International Civil Aviation signed at Chicago on the 7th
day of December, 1944 (including any Annex thereto relating to international
standards and recommended practices) as amended from time to time. Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to make rules as may
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the issuance of Radio Telephone
Operator (Restricted) Certificate and Licence to persons engaged in the operation
and maintenance of aircraft, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
International Telecommunication Convention as amended from time to time.
Clause 12 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make
rules providing for the investigation of any accident or incident arising out of or in
the course of the navigation in or over India of any aircraft, or anywhere of aircraft
registered in India.
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
the prevention of danger arising to the public health by the introduction or spread
of any infectious or contagious disease from aircraft arriving at or being at any
aerodrome and for the prevention of the conveyance of infection or contagion by
means of any aircraft leaving an aerodrome; and to make, with respect to aircraft
and aerodromes or any specified aerodrome, rules providing for any of the matters
for which rules under sub-clauses (i) to (viii) of clause (p) of sub-section (1) of
section 6 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908, may be made with respect to vessels and
ports.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make temporary rules with respect to aircraft and persons travelling or things
carried therein and aerodromes as it deems necessary in the circumstances.
Clause 16 of the Bill inter alia empowers the Central Government to make
rules which may provide for securing the safe custody and redelivery of any
property which, while not in proper custody, is found on any aerodrome or in any
aircraft on any aerodrome.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules regulating all matters incidental or subsidiary to the exercise of the
power to detain the aircraft.
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the manner in which the Central Government or any officer authorised
in this behalf, may impose any restriction or suspend or cancel the licence,
certificate or approval issued to any person under the Act.
Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the demolition of building or structure or cut the tree or reduce the
height of such building, structure or tree by an officer authorised by it in this behalf.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules to provide for the manner in which and the amount for which an offence
punishable under the Act, or any rules made thereunder, may be compounded. Sub-
clause (4) of said clause also empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for the manner in which an application for compounding of offence shall
be made.

Sub-clause (2) of clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules to provide for the manner in which penalty may be adjudicated by the
designated officers.
Sub-clause (7) of clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules to provide for the form and manner in which an appeal may be filed
and the documents and fee it may accompany.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of the design, manufacture, maintenance,
possession, use, operation, sale, export and import of aircraft and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rammohan Naidu Kinjarapu, Minister of Civil Aviation)