AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 111 of 2024
THE BILLS OF LADING BILL, 2024
A
BILL
to make provisions for the transfer of rights of suit and all liabilities to the
consignee named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of a bill of lading,
to whom the property in the goods mentioned in the bill of lading shall pass,
upon or by reason of a consignment or an endorsement, and for matters
connected therewith or related thereto.
WHEREAS by the custom of merchants, a bill of lading of goods being
transferable by endorsement, the property in the goods may thereby pass to the
endorsee, but nevertheless all rights in respect of the contract contained in the bill
of lading continue in the original shipper or owner;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient that such rights should pass with the property;

AND WHEREAS it frequently happens that the goods in respect of which bills
of lading purport to be signed have not been laden on board;
AND WHEREAS it is proper that such bills of lading in the hands of a bona fide
holder for value should not be questioned by the master or other person signing
the same, on the ground of the goods not having been laden as aforesaid.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Bills of Lading Act, 2024.
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5
Rights under 2. Every consignee of goods named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of
bills of lading to
a bill of lading, to whom the property in the goods therein mentioned shall pass,
vest in
consignee or upon or by reason of such consignment or endorsement, shall have transferred to
endorsee. and vested in him all rights of suit, and be subject to the same liabilities in respect
of such goods as if the contract contained in the bill of lading had been made with 10
such consignee or endorsee.
Right of 3. Nothing contained in this Act shall prejudice or affect––
stoppage in
transit or claims (a) any right of stoppage in transit; or
for freight not to
be affected. (b) any right to claim freight against the original shipper or owner; or
(c) any liability of the consignee or endorsee by reason or in consequence 15
of his being such consignee or endorsee, or of his receipt of the goods by
reason or in consequence of such consignment or endorsement.
Bill of lading in 4. (1) Every bill of lading in the hands of a consignee or endorsee for
hands of
valuable consideration, representing goods to have been shipped on board a
consignee, etc.,
conclusive vessel, shall be conclusive evidence of such shipment as, against the master or 20
evidence of other person signing the same, notwithstanding that such goods or some part
shipment as
thereof may not have been so shipped:
against master,
etc.
Provided that the master or other person so signing may exonerate himself
in respect of such misrepresentation, by showing that it was caused without any
default on his part, and wholly by the fraud of the shipper, or of the holder, or 25
some person under whom the holder claims.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply where the holder of the bill of
lading shall have had actual notice at the time of receiving such bill of lading that
the goods had not been laden on board.
Power of 5. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem 30
Central
Government to
necessary, for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act.
give directions.
Repeal and 6. (1) The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856 is hereby repealed. 9 of 1856.
savings.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (1), it
shall not affect,––
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything done or 35
any action taken or purported to have been or taken or suffered thereunder
under the Act so repealed; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under the Act so repealed; or

(c) the operation of any rule, notification, order, notice or direction
issued, or exemption granted thereunder, in so far as it is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, and shall be in force until it is repealed or
superseded under the corresponding provisions of this Act; or
5 (d) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act
so repealed; or
(e) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty may
10 be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed;
(f) the reference made to the repealed Act under any other legislation,
rule, order, or any other legal instrument and any such reference shall, in so
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be construed as a
reference to this Act or its corresponding provisions.
15 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of
10 of 1897. section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply with regard to the effect
of repeal.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856 (the said Act) was enacted to amend the
Law relating to Bills of Lading with a view to address two aspects, namely,––
(a) transferring of all rights in respect of the contract contained in the
bill of lading along with the property to the consignee or endorsee of the bill
of lading; and
(b)ensuring that a transferred bill of lading in the hands of a bona fide
holder be treated as conclusive evidence of the goods being laden on board.
2.Since endorsement of rights over bills of lading is an important aspect of
its use in carriage of goods by sea, the provisions of the said Act have extensive
commercial applicability and is crucial to determine the transfer of rights of suit
and liabilities to endorsees and consignees to whom any bill of lading has been
transferred.
3. Though the substantive aspects of the said Act continue to remain
relevant, being a pre-independence statute, it is imperative that the provisions of
the said Act require to be revisited without changing the substance or spirit of the
said Act, so as to bring it in line with modern legislations in order to facilitate
simplification and ease of understanding. Further, a new provision is proposed to
be incorporated to empower the Central Government to issue directions to carry
out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
4.Accordingly, it is proposed to repeal and reenact the said Act with a new
legislation and for the said purpose, to introduce the Bills of Lading Bill, 2024 in
Parliament.
5.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL.
The 6th August, 2024.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make provisions for the transfer of rights of suit and all liabilities to the
consignee named in a bill of lading and every endorsee of a bill of lading,
to whom the property in the goods mentioned in the bill of lading shall pass,
upon or by reason of a consignment or an endorsement, and for matters
connected therewith or related thereto.
————
(Shri Sarbananda Sonowal, Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways)