AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XIX of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED
TRIBES) ORDERS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 to modify the list of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Odisha.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1.This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Short title.
Tribes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 2024.
5 2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(a) “Scheduled Castes Order” means the Constitution (Scheduled
C.O. 19. Castes) Order, 1950;
(b) “Scheduled Tribes Order” means the Constitution (Scheduled
C.O. 22. Tribes) Order, 1950.

Amendment of 3.The Scheduled Castes Order is hereby amended in the manner and to the
Scheduled
extent specified in the First Schedule.
Castes Order.
4.The Scheduled Tribes Order is hereby amended in the manner and to the
Amendment of
Scheduled extent specified in the Second Schedule.
Tribes Order.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 3)
C.O. 19. In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, in the Schedule, in
PART XIII.—Odisha, entries 87 and 88 shall be omitted.

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 4)
C.O. 22. In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in the Schedule, in
PART XII.—Orissa,—
(a) for “PART XII.―Orissa”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“PART XII.―Odisha”;
(b)for entry 6, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:―
“6. Bhuiya, Bhuyan, Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan”;
(c)in entry 8, after “Tamaria Bhumij”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“, Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij, Tamundia Bhumij,
Tamulia Bhumij, Tamadia Bhumij, Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia”;
(d)for entry 9, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“9. Bhunjia, Chuktia Bhunjia”;
(e)in entry 13, after “Banda Paroja”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“, Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bondo, Bonda, Banda”;
(f)for entry 17, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“17. Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva, Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava”;
(g)in entry 28, after “Kanwar”, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“, Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr,
Koanr, Kuanwar”;
(h)for entry 31, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“31. Khond, Kond, Kandha, Kandha Kumbhar, Nanguli Kandha,
Sitha Kandha, Kondh, Kui, Kui (Kandha), Buda Kondh, Bura Kandha,
Desia Kandha, Dungaria Kondh, Kutia Kandha, Kandha Gauda, Muli
Kondh, Malua Kondh, Pengo Kandha, Raja Kondh, Raj Khond”;
(i) in entry 47, after “Mankidi”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“, Mankidia”;
(j)in entry 53, after “Uran”, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“, Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara, Oraon Mudi”;
(k) in entry 55, after “Solia Paroja”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“, Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja,
Selia Paroja”;
(l)in entry 57, after “Rajuar”, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“, Rajual, Rajuad”;
(m) in entry 59, after “Vesu Saora”, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“, Saara”;
(n)after entry 62, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“63. Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora (in
undivided Koraput district which includes Koraput, Nowrangapur,
Rayagada and Malkangiri districts)
64.Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Scheduled Castes have been defined in clause (24) of article 366 of the
Constitution as “such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such
castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for
the purposes of this Constitution.”.
Scheduled Tribes have been defined in clause (25) of article 366 of the
Constitution as “such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within
such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled
Tribes for the purposes of this Constitution.”.
2. Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution provide as under:—
“341. Scheduled Castes.—(1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the
Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes
or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation
to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any
caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be
varied by any subsequent notification.
342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the
Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes
in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe
or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community,
but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be
varied by any subsequent notification.”.
3. According to the provisions of articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution,
the first list of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were notified
during the year 1950 in respect of various States and Union territories, vide the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950, respectively. These lists were modified from time to time.
List of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Odisha has been modified, vide, the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders (Amendment)
Act, 2002 (10 of 2003).
4.The State Government of Odisha has recommended for inclusion of four
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) in their own names in the list of
Scheduled Tribes in respect to the State of Odisha, as under:—
(i) Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan as synonyms of Bhuiya, Bhuyan at
Sl. No. 6;
(ii)Chuktia Bhunjia as synonym of Bhunjia at Sl. No. 9;
(iii) Bondo as sub-entry under Scheduled Tribes “Bondo Poraja,
Bonda Paroja, Banda Paroja” at Sl. No.13; and
(iv)Mankidia as synonym of Scheduled Tribe “Mankirdia” at Sl. No. 47.

5. The State Government of Odisha has also recommended to omit two
community names listed as Scheduled Castes namely, (i) Tamadia at Sl. No. 87
and (ii) Tamudia at Sl. No. 88 from the list of Scheduled Castes and to include
the said community names in the Scheduled Tribes list in respect of the State of
Odisha, as under:—
“Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia, Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij,
Tamundia Bhumij, Tamulia Bhumij, Tamadia Bhumij”, as a sub-entry
under main entry “Bhumij” at Sl. No. 8.
6.The State Government of Odisha has also recommended for inclusion of
communities which have phonetic variations of the communities in the existing
list of Scheduled Tribes, as under:—
(i) Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bonda, Banda as sub-entry under
Schedule Tribes “Bondo Poraja, Bonda Paroja, Banda Paroja" at Sl. No.13;
(ii)Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava as subsect of Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva
at Sl. No. 17;
(iii) Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr, Koanr,
Kuanwar as synonym of Scheduled Tribes “Kawar, Kanwar” at Sl. No. 28;
(iv) Inclusion of Kui (Kandha) as a new sub-entry under the
Scheduled Tribe Khond and Kandha Kumbhar community as a subsect of
Kandha Scheduled Tribe at Sl. No. 31;
(v) Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara and Oraon Mudi communities as
synonyms of Oraon listed at Sl. No. 53;
(vi) Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja, Selia
Paroja, as synonym of Scheduled Tribe Paroja at Sl. No. 55;
(vii)Rajual, Rajuad as synonym of Scheduled Tribe Rajuar at Sl. No. 57;
(viii)Saara as synonym under Saora, Savar, Saura, Sahara, etc. at Sl.
No. 59.
7.The State Government of Odisha has also recommended for inclusion of
communities as new entry, as under:—
(i) Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora with area
restriction (in undivided Koraput District which includes Koraput,
Nowrangapur, Rayagada and Malkangiri districts) at Sl. No. 63;
(ii)Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi at Sl. No. 64.
8.On the basis of recommendation of the State Government of Odisha and
after consultation with the Registrar General of India and the National
Commission for Scheduled Tribes and National Commission for Scheduled
Castes, it is proposed to modify the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the State of Odisha by amending the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
9. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 proposes to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1950, in the Schedule in PART XIII.—Odisha and the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in the Schedule, in PART XII.—Orissa,—
(A) In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, in the
Schedule, in PART XIII.—Odisha, entries 87 and 88 shall be omitted;
(B) (a) for PART XII.—Orissa, the following shall be substituted,
namely:— “ PART XII.—Odisha”;
(b)for entry 6, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“6. Bhuiya, Bhuyan, Pauri Bhuyan, Paudi Bhuyan”;

(c) in entry 8, after “Tamaria Bhumij”, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Tamodia Bhumij, Tamudia Bhumij, Tamundia Bhumij,
Tamulia Bhumij, Tamadia Bhumij, Tamadia, Tamaria, Tamudia”;
(d) for entry 9, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“9. Bhunjia, Chuktia Bhunjia”;
(e) in entry 13, after “Banda Paroja”, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Banda Paraja, Bonda Paraja, Bondo, Bonda, Banda”;
(f) for entry 17, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“17. Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva, Durua, Dhurua, Dhurava”;
(g) in entry 28, after “Kanwar”, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Kaur, Kunwar, Kaonr, Kuanr, Konwar, Kuanar, Kaanr, Koanr,
Kuanwar”;
(h) in entry 31, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“31. Khond, Kond, Kandha, Kandha Kumbhar, Nanguli
Kandha, Sitha Kandha, Kondh, Kui, Kui (Kandha), Buda Kondh, Bura
Kandha, Desia Kandha, Dungaria Kondh, Kutia Kandha, Kandha
Gauda, Muli Kondh, Malua Kondh, Pengo Kandha, Raja Kondh, Raj
Khond”;
(i) in entry 47, after “Mankidi”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Mankidia”;
(j) in entry 53, after “Uran”, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Uram, Oram, Uraon, Dhangara, Oraon Mudi”;
(k) in entry 55, after “Solia Paroja”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Bareng Jhodia Paroja, Penga Paroja, Pengu Paroja, Porja, Selia
Paroja”;
(l) in entry 57, after “Rajuar”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Rajual, Rajuad”;
(m) in entry 59, after “Vesu Saora”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Saara”;
(n) after entry 62, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“63. Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora (in
undivided Koraput District which includes, Koraput, Nowrangapur,
Rayagada and Malkangiri districts)
64. Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi”.
10. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
NEW DELHI; ARJUN MUNDA.
The 2nd February, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the State of Odisha by amending the Constitution (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The
amendment in the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes relating to the
State of Odisha may entail some additional recurring and non-recurring
expenditure on account of benefits to be provided to the persons belonging to the
communities proposed in the Bill under the continuing schemes meant for the
welfare of the Scheduled Tribes.
2. It is not possible to estimate the likely additional expenditure to be
incurred on this account at this stage. However, the expenditure, if any, shall be
accommodated within the approved budgetary outlay of the Government.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
(C.O. 19)
* * * * *
87.Tamadia
88.Tamudia
* * * * *
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
( C.O. 22)
* * * * *
PART XII.—Orissa
* * * * *
6.Bhuiya, Bhuyan
* * * * *
8. Bhumij, Teli Bhumij, Haladipohria Bhumij, Haladi Pokharia Bhumija,
Desi Bhumij, Desia Bhumij, Tamaria Bhumij
9.Bhunjia
* * * * *
13.Bondo Poraja, Bonda Paroja, Banda Paroja
* * * * *
17.Dharua, Dhuruba, Dhurva
* * * * *
28.Kawar, Kanwar
* * * * *
31.Khond, Kond, Kandha, Nanguli Kandha, Sitha Kandha Kondh, Kui, Buda
Kondh, Bura Kandha, Desia Kandha, Dungaria Kondh, Kutia Kandha, Kandha
Gauda, Muli Kondh, Malua Kondh, Pengo Kandha, Raja Kondh, Raj Khond
* * * * *
47.Mankirdia, Mankria, Mankidi
* * * * *
53.Oraon, Dhangar, Uran
* * * * *
55. Paroja, Parja, Bodo Paroja, Barong Jhodia Paroja, Chhelia Paroja, Jhodia
Paroja, Konda Paroja, Paraja, Ponga Paroja, Sodia Paroja, Sano Paroja, Solia Paroja
* * * * *
57.Rajuar
* * * * *
59. Saora, Savar, Saura, Sahara, Arsi Saora, Based Saora, Bhimma Saora,
Chumura Saora, Jara Savar, Jadu Saora, Jati Saora, Juari Saora, Kampu Saora,
Kampa Soura, Kapo Saora, Kindal Saora, Kumbi Kancher Saora, Kalapithia
Saora, Kirat Saora, Lania Soara, Lamba Lanjia Saora, Laura Saora, Luar Saora,
Laria Savar, Malia, Saora, Malla Saora, Uriya Saora, Raika Saora, Sudda Saora,
Sarda Saora, Tankala Saora, Patro Saora, Vesu Saora
* * * * *

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 to modify the list of Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Odisha.
————
(Shri Arjun Munda, Minister of Tribal Affairs and Agriculture and Farmers Welfare)
RS-P&PS-GB(E)—007—03.02.2024