AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 5TH FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. XX of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 to modify the
list of Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order Short title.
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
C.O. 22. 5 2. In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in the Schedule, in Amendment of
PART I.―Andhra Pradesh,— Constitution
(Scheduled
(a)for entry 25, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— Tribes) Order,
1950.
“25. Porja, Bondo Porja, Khond Porja, Parangiperja”;
(b)for entry 28, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
10 “28. Savaras, Kapu Savaras, Maliya Savaras, Konda Savaras,
Khutto Savaras”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Scheduled Tribes have been defined in clause (25) of article 366 of the
Constitution as "such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such
tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes
for the purposes of this Constitution.".
2.Article 342 of the Constitution provides as under:—
“342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may with respect to any
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the
Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes
in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe
or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community,
but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be
varied by any subsequent notification.".
3.According to the provisions of article 342 of the Constitution, the first list
of the Scheduled Tribes was notified during the year 1950 in respect of various
States and Union territories, vide the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,
respectively. The list of Scheduled Tribes of Andhra Pradesh was last modified vide,
The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (No. 6 of 2014.)
4. On the basis of recommendation of the State Government of Andhra
Pradesh and after consultation with the Registrar General of India and the National
Commission for Scheduled Tribes, it is proposed to modify the list of Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the State of Andhra Pradesh by amending the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
5. The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024
proposes to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 in the Schedule,
in PART I.—Andhra Pradesh, C.O. 22,—
(a)for entry 25, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“25. Porja, Bondo Porja, Khond Porja, Parangiperja”
(b)for entry 28, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“28. Savaras, Kapu Savaras, Maliya Savaras, Konda Savaras,
Khutto Savaras”
6.The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
NEW DELHI; ARJUN MUNDA.
The 2nd February, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend the list of Scheduled Tribes in the State of Andhra
Pradesh by amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The
amendment in the list of Scheduled Tribes relating to the State of Andhra Pradesh
may entail some additional recurring and non-recurring expenditure on account of
benefits to be provided to the persons belonging to the communities proposed in the
Bill under the continuing schemes meant for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes.
2.It is not possible to estimate the likely additional expenditure to be incurred
on this account at this stage. However, the expenditure, if any, shall be
accommodated within the approved budgetary outlay of the Government.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
C.O. 22
* * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
PART I.—Andhra Pradesh
* * * * *
25.Porja, Parangiperja
* * * * *
28.Savaras, Kapu Savaras, Maliya Savaras, Khutto Savaras
* * * * *

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 to modify the
list of Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh.
————
(Shri Arjun Munda, Minister of Tribal Affairs and Agriculture and Farmers Welfare)
RS-P&PS-GB(E)—008—03.02.2024